1.1 Preamble

Are you the kind of person who skims the beginning just to see whether to read the
entire thing? You’re in luck.

We’ve prepared one sentence, one image, one thousand word, and one essay summaries
of the concepts behind startup societies and network states. Just click those links if
you’re impatient. And of course, for the full experience, you can read it one page at a
time.

Speaking of pages, every section of this book is online and shareable as an individual
web page. For example, the URL to this section is thenetworkstate.com/preamble.
This allows you to link directly1 to any bit of the book for discussion. Moreover, unlike
the typical book that’s frozen in time, think of this as a dynamic bookapp that gets
continuously updated. You can see the latest version online, or you can follow the
instructions at thenetworkstate.com/kindle.gif to get the latest version on your Kindle.

When reading it, think of this work as a toolbox, not a manifesto. You don’t need to
agree with all of it to get something out of it. We’ve structured it in modular form
for that reason. Chapter 1 is an overview of the ideas. Chapters 2, 3, and 4 present
an analysis that leads to a concerning forecast for the near future, the problem of
American Anarchy and Chinese Control. And Chapter 5 presents our proposed solution
for maintaining liberal values in an illiberal world: startup societies and network states.

If you’re a partisan of the US establishment or the CCP, you may not agree with our
problem statement at all. If you’re an orthodox Bitcoin maximalist, you likely won’t
agree with every aspect of our proposed solution. And if you’re coming in from another
school of thought, you may only agree with parts of the problem or solution as we’ve
framed them. Nevertheless, we believe there’s enough flexibility in the idea of the
network state that you can customize it and make it your own.

    1An obvious feature, yet missing from the traditional ebook experience.

                                                                 8

10
1.2. THE NETWORK STATE IN ONE SENTENCE                                                  9


But what exactly is a network state?





1.2 The Network State in One Sentence


In one informal sentence:


        A network state is a highly aligned online community with a capacity for
        collective action that crowdfunds territory around the world and eventually
        gains diplomatic recognition from pre-existing states.


When we think of a nation state, we immediately think of the lands, but when we think
of a network state, we should instantly think of the minds. That is, if the nation state
system starts with the map of the globe and assigns each patch of land to a single state,
the network state system starts with the 7+ billion humans of the world and attracts
each mind to one or more networks.


Here’s a more complex definition that extends that concept and pre-emptively covers
many edge cases:


        A network state is a social network with a moral innovation, a sense of na-
        tional consciousness, a recognized founder, a capacity for collective action,
        an in-person level of civility, an integrated cryptocurrency, a consensual gov-
        ernment limited by a social smart contract, an archipelago of crowdfunded
        physical territories, a virtual capital, and an on-chain census that proves
        a large enough population, income, and real-estate footprint to attain a
        measure of diplomatic recognition.


OK, that’s a mouthful! It’s lengthy because there are many internet phenomena that
share some but not all of the properties of a network state. For example, neither Bitcoin
nor Facebook nor a DAO is a network state, because each lacks certain qualities – like
diplomatic recognition – which are core to anything we’d think of as the next version
of the nation state.


(If you want to skip ahead, we expand on each part of the definition in Chapter 5. But
it’ll make more sense if you read the text all the way through. For what it’s worth,
the technical definition of a nation state is similarly multi-clausal, because it needs to
exclude things we don’t typically think about, like stateless nations.)

11
10                                                                                CHAPTER 1. QUICKSTART



1.3 The Network State in One Image



















A picture helps. The dashboard above shows what a million-person network state looks
like on the map. Specifically, it depicts a network state with 1.7 million people, more
than 157 billion dollars in annual income, and a 136 million square meter footprint.

The first thing we notice is that a network state isn’t physically centralized like a
nation state, nor limited in scale like a city state. It’s geographically decentralized and
connected by the internet.

The second thing we see is that you could feasibly start this kind of country from your
computer. That is, just as Facebook grew from one person’s laptop, a million-person
network state that owns a global archipelago of physical territory could start as a
one-person startup society, as shown in this gif: thenetworkstate.com/networkstate.gif.

The third thing we see is how central the real-time census is to the network state. The
dashboard shown combines concepts from coins, companies, and countries to focus a
society on growth in people, annual income, and real estate footprint.

Continued growth is a continuous plebiscite, a vote of confidence by the people inside
who remain and those outside who apply. Roughly speaking, a successful network state
is one that attracts aligned immigrants, and an unsuccessful network state is one that
loses them.

That doesn’t mean each network state must grow to infinity, or that all states need
accept the same kind of person, but that the community of network states as a whole is
focused on building admirable societies that people want to join. Different states will
focus on different metrics; imagine a network state premised on improving its citizens’
overall life expectancy, or one aimed at provably right-shifting the income distribution
for all. You get what you measure.

12
1.4. THE NETWORK STATE IN ONE THOUSAND WORDS                                            11



1.4 The Network State in One Thousand Words





















Technology has allowed us to start new companies, new communities, and new curren-
cies. But can we use it to create new cities, or even new countries? A key concept is to
go cloud first, land last — but not land never —by starting with an online community
and then materializing it into the physical world. We get there in seven steps:

    1. Found a startup society. This is simply an online community with aspirations of
         something greater. Anyone can found one, just like anyone can found a company
         or cryptocurrency.2 And the founder’s legitimacy comes from whether people opt
         to follow them.

    2. Organize it into a group capable of collective action. Given a sufficiently dedicated
         online community, the next step is to organize it into a network union. Unlike
         a social network, a network union has a purpose: it coordinates its members for
         their mutual benefit. And unlike a traditional union, a network union is not
         set up solely in opposition to a particular corporation, so it can take a variety
         of different collective actions.3 Unionization is a key step because it turns an
         otherwise ineffective online community into a group of people working together
         for a common cause.

    3. Build trust oine and a cryptoeconomy online. Begin holding in-person mee-
         tups in the physical world, of increasing scale and duration, while simultaneously
         building an internal economy using cryptocurrency.

    2Note however that just as one does not simply “start a public company,” one does not simply
“start a network state.” Instead, you begin with a startup society, which is to a network state what a
startup is to Google. It’s the embryonic form.
    3Actions include: crowdfunding, job placement, bulk purchasing, and collective bargaining with
corporations and states. Note that a network union is a useful endpoint in its own right. Just as small
businesses can provide value to customers without going public, network unions can provide value to
members without becoming network states.

13
12                                                                                       CHAPTER 1. QUICKSTART



    4. Crowdfund physical nodes. Once sufficient trust has been built and funds have
         been accumulated, start crowdfunding apartments, houses, and even towns to
         bring digital citizens into the physical world within real co-living communities.

    5. Digitally connect physical communities. Link these physical nodes together into
         a network archipelago, a set of digitally connected physical territories distributed
         around the world. Nodes of the network archipelago range from one-person apart-
         ments to in-person communities of arbitrary size. Physical access is granted by
         holding a web3 cryptopassport, and mixed reality is used to seamlessly link the
         online and oine worlds.

    6. Conduct an on-chain census. As the society scales, run a cryptographically au-
         ditable census to demonstrate the growing size of your population, income, and
         real-estate footprint. This is how a startup society proves traction in the face of
         skepticism.

    7. Gain diplomatic recognition. A startup society with sufficient scale should eventu-
         ally be able to negotiate for diplomatic recognition from at least one pre-existing
         government, and from there gradually increased sovereignty, slowly becoming a
         true network state.

The key idea is to populate the land from the cloud, and do so all over the earth.
Unlike an ideologically disaligned and geographically centralized legacy state, which
packs millions of disputants in one place, a network state is ideologically aligned but
geographically decentralized. The people are spread around the world in clusters of
varying size, but their hearts are in one place.

As the population and economy of a startup society grow comparable to that of a legacy
state, with millions of citizens and billions in income, it should eventually4 be able to
attain recognition from existing sovereigns — and ultimately the United Nations —
just as Bitcoin has now become a bona fide national currency.


1.5 The Network State in One Essay

A proposition is not a nation, though it can become one. Here we describe a peaceful,
reproducible process for turning an online community premised on a proposition into
a physical state with a virtual capital: a network state, the sequel to the nation state.

We want to be able to peacefully start a new state for the same reason we want a bare
plot of earth, a blank sheet of paper, an empty text buffer, a fresh startup, or a clean
slate. Because we want to build something new without historical constraint.

The financial demand for a clean slate is clear. People buy millions of acres of vacant
land and incorporate hundreds of thousands of new companies each year, spending

    4Note the progression: from startup society, to network union, to network archipelago, and finally
to network state. First build the collective muscle to do real things, then manage real money and real
estate, and finally become recognized as a real state.

14
1.5. THE NETWORK STATE IN ONE ESSAY                                                       13


billions just to get that fresh start. And now that it is possible to start not just new
companies but new communities and even new currencies, we see people flocking to
create those as well.

The societal value of a clean slate is also clear. In the technology sector alone, the
ability to form new companies has created trillions of dollars in wealth over the past
few decades. Indeed, if we imagine aworld where you couldn’t just obtain a blank sheet
of paper but had to erase an older one, where you couldn’t just acquire bare land but
had to knock down a standing building, where you couldn’t just create a new company
but had to reform an existing firm, we imagine endless conflict over scarce resources.

Perhaps we don’t have to think too hard to imagine this world. It resembles our own.
In the distant past people could only write on clay tablets, in the recent past they were
executed for contemplating entrepreneurship, and in the immediate present they are
arguing over replacing an ancient gas station. In these times and places, making a fresh
start has been technologically infeasible, politically impossible, or judicially punishable.

And that’s where we are today with countries, cities, nations, governments, institutions,
and much of the physical world. Because the brand new is unthinkable, we fight over
the old.

But perhaps we can change that.


1.5.1 How to Start a New Country

There are at least six ways to start a new country; three are conventional and three
are unconventional. We will introduce them only to deprioritize them all in favor of a
seventh.


1. Election

The most conventional way to start a new country involves winning sufficient power
in an election to either (a) rewrite the laws of an existing state or (b) carve out a new
one from scratch with the recognition of the international community. This is the most
widely discussed path, and by far the most crowded —perhaps too crowded.


2. Revolution

The second obvious way is a political revolution. We don’t advise attempting this.
Particularly momentous elections are sometimes referred to as revolutions, though a
revolution frequently involves bloodshed. Revolutions are infrequent, but everyone
knows that they mean a new government.


3. War

The third conventional way to form a new state is to win a war. We don’t advise
attempting this either. A war is, of course, not independent from the other two.

15
14                                                                                       CHAPTER 1. QUICKSTART



Indeed, both elections and revolutions can lead to wars that end up carving out new
polities. Like a revolution, a war is infrequent and undesirable, but is a means by which
to redraw state borders.



4. Micronations

Now we get to the unconventional. The most obvious of the unconventional approaches
– and the one most people think of when they hear the concept of “starting a new
country” – occurs when an eccentric plants a flag on an offshore platform or disputed
patch of dirt and declares themselves king of nothing. If the issue with elections is that
too many people care about them, the issue with these so-called micronations is that
too few people care. Because a state (like a currency) is an inherently social affair, a
few people in the middle of nowhere won’t be able to organize a military, enforce laws,
or be recognized by other countries. Moreover, while an existing state may be content
to let people harmlessly5 LARP a fake country in their backyard, an actual threat to
sovereignty typically produces a response with real guns, whether that be the Falklands
or Sakhalin.



5. Seasteading

Here is where things start to get interesting. Conceived by Patri Friedman and backed
by Peter Thiel, seasteading essentially starts with the observation that cruise ships
exist, and asks whether we could move from a few weeks on the water at a time to
semi-permanent habitation in international waters (with frequent docking, of course).
If the cost of cruise ships falls, this approach becomes more feasible. But while there are
individuals who live on cruise ships year-round, we haven’t yet seen a scaled example.6



6. Space

Perhaps the most prestigious of the start-a-new-country paths is the idea of colonizing
other planets. Unlike seasteading or micronations, space exploration started at the
government level and has been glamorized in many movies and TV shows, so it enjoys
a higher degree of social acceptability. This path is typically received as temporarily
technically infeasible, rather than outright crazy. Elon Musk’s SpaceX is one entity
seriously contemplating the logistics of starting a new state on Mars.


    5A LARP is a live-action roleplaying game. It also describes adults playing a seemingly pointless
game of make-believe.
    6We actually think seasteading can be revived in the long-term. Why? Because it can be made
part of the network state paradigm. You just need to grow a startup society capable of crowdfunding
a cruise ship. Your society wouldn’t start with something so expensive, of course; it’d start by
getting much more modest pieces of territory around the world and connecting them into a network
archipelago. But once you have a startup society with tens of thousands of members, something as
crazy as a crowdfunded cruise ship becomes a possibility.

16
1.5. THE NETWORK STATE IN ONE ESSAY                                                       15



7. Network States

And finally we arrive at our preferred method: the network state. Our idea is to proceed
cloud first, land last. Rather than starting with the physical territory, we start with
the digital community. We create a startup society, organize it into a network union,
crowdfund the physical nodes of a network archipelago, and — in the fullness of time
— eventually negotiate for diplomatic recognition to become a true network state. We
build the embryonic state as an open-source project, we organize our internal economy
around remote work, we cultivate in-person levels of civility, we simulate architecture
in VR, and we create art and literature that reflects our values.

When we crowdfund territory in the real world, it’s not necessarily contiguous territory.
Because an under-appreciated fact is that the internet allows us to network enclaves.
Put another way, a network archipelago need not acquire all its territory in one place
at one time. It can connect a thousand apartments, a hundred houses, and a dozen cul-
de-sacs in different cities into a new kind of fractal polity with its capital in the cloud.
Community members migrate between these enclaves and crowdfund territory nearby,
with every individual dwelling and group house presenting an independent opportunity
for expansion. And with a thousand such enclaves, rather than four directions to
expand (north, east, south, and west), there are more like four thousand.

What we’ve described thus far is much like an ethnic diaspora, in which emigrants are
internationally dispersed but connected by communication channels with each other
and the motherland. The twist is that our version is a reverse diaspora: a community
that forms first on the internet, builds a culture online, and only then comes together
in-person to build dwellings and structures. In a sense, you can think of each physical
outpost of this digital community as a cloud embassy, similar to the grassroots Bitcoin
embassies that have arisen around the world to help people better understand Bitcoin.
New recruits can visit either the virtual or physical parts of a network state, beta test
it, and decide to leave or stay.

Now, with all this talk of embassies and countries one might well contend that network
states, like the aforementioned micronations, are also just a LARP. Unlike microna-
tions, however, they are set up to be a scaled LARP, a feat of imagination practiced
by large numbers of people at the same time. And the experience of cryptocurrencies
over the last decade shows us just how powerful such a shared LARP can be.


1.5.2 Minimum Necessary Innovation

Let’s pause and summarize for a second. The main difference between the seventh
method (network states) and the previous six (election, revolution, war, micronations,
seasteading, and space) is that the seventh straddles the boundary between practicality
and impracticality.

It is now feasible to build million-person online communities, start billion-dollar digital
currencies, and architect buildings in VR to then crowdfund into reality. The network
state concept stacks together many existing technologies, rather than requiring the

17
16                                                                                CHAPTER 1. QUICKSTART


invention of new ones — like Mars-capable rockets, or permanent-habitation seasteads.
At the same time, it avoids the obvious pathways of election, revolution, and war – all
of which turn ugly, and none of which provide much venue for individual initiative.

In other words, the network state takes the most robust existing tech stack we have –
namely, the suite of technologies built around the internet – and uses it to route around
political roadblocks, without waiting for future physical innovation.



1.5.3 What Counts as a New Country?

Having outlined these seven methods, the careful reader will notice that we have played
a bit fast and loose with the definition of what a “new country” is.

First, what do we mean by a new country? One definition is that starting a new country
means settling a wholly new territory, like colonizing Mars. Another definition is that
simply changing the form of government actually changes the country, like France
moving from the Second French Republic to the Second French Empire. Rather than
using either these strict or loose definitions, we will use both numerical and societal
definitions of a new country.

The numerical definition begins with visualizing a hypothetical nationrealestatepop.com
site similar to coinmarketcap.com, which aggregates the cryptographically audited
censuses of startup societies aspiring to become network states. This dashboard would
show in realtime the number of community members, the acreage of real estate owned by
those members, and the community’s on-chain income. A startup society with five mil-
lion people worldwide, thousands of square miles of (discontiguous) community-owned
land, and billions in annual income would have indisputable numerical significance.

This in turn leads us to the societal definition: a new country is one that is diplomati-
cally recognized by other countries as a legitimate polity capable of self-determination.
A state with enough such bilateral relationships would have the societal significance
to gain accession to a group of pre-existing states like ASEAN, the OAS, the African
Union, the EU, or the United Nations.

This combination of numerical and societal metrics matches the emergence of cryp-
tocurrency. Initially ignored, then mocked as an obvious failure, within five years after
its invention Bitcoin attained a billion-dollar market capitalization (a numerical suc-
cess) and was subsequently listed on CNBC and Bloomberg alongside blue-chip stocks
(a form of societal recognition). At each step Bitcoin could keep ascending numerically
on its own, with greater societal recognition following in its wake. By 2020 it had
changed the trajectory of the People’s Bank of China, the IMF, Goldman Sachs, JP
Morgan, and the World Bank. By 2021, Bitcoin became legal tender in El Salvador,
a sovereign state. And by mid-2022 the Central African Republic had followed, with
dozens more considering Bitcoin as legal tender, including Panama.

18
1.5. THE NETWORK STATE IN ONE ESSAY                                                                   17



1.5.4 Most Countries are Small Countries

Cryptocurrency could achieve these heights because money has both numerical and
societal aspects.7 The numbers could be piled up before the societal accolades followed.
Once Bitcoin had proven that it couldn’t be easily counterfeited or hacked, the shared
belief of the millions of cryptocurrency holders worldwide was enough to get BTC
from a value of zero to a market cap of billions, and from there to a listing on every
Bloomberg Terminal and exchange. Societal traction of this kind paved the way for
more numerical traction, and a virtuous cycle followed.

Could a startup society follow a similar path? Yes. A cryptographically auditable
census could prove that a growing startup society had 1-10M committed digital citizens,
large cryptocurrency reserves, years of continuous existence, and physical holdings all
over the earth. That numerical traction could then be used to achieve the societal
traction of diplomatic recognition.

Why? Because most countries are small countries. A new state with a population of
1-10M would actually be comparable to most existing states. That’s because of the 193
UN-recognized sovereign states, 20% have a population of less than 1M and 55% have
a population of less than 10M. This includes many countries typically thought of as
legitimate, such as Luxembourg (615k), Cyprus (1.2M), Estonia (1.3M), New Zealand
(4.7M), Ireland (4.8M), and Singapore (5.8M). These “user counts” are surprisingly
small by tech standards!




















Of course, mere quantity is not everything. The strength of affiliation to our hypo-
thetical network state matters, as does the time on the property, the percentage of net
worth stored in the currency, and the fraction of contacts found in the community.

Still, once we remember that Facebook has 3B+ users, Twitter has 300M+, and many

    7The idealized technical fact exists entirely independent of what any human thinks (like the value
of g, the gravitational constant), while the idealized political fact is entirely about what humans think
(like the location of a national border).

19
18                                                                                CHAPTER 1. QUICKSTART


individual influencers have 1M+ followers, it starts to be not too crazy to imagine we
can build a 1-10M person startup society with a genuine sense of national consciousness,
an integrated cryptocurrency, and a plan to crowdfund many pieces of territory around
the world. With the internet, we can digitally sew these disjoint enclaves together into
a new kind of polity that achieves diplomatic recognition: a network state.

20
Chapter 2



History as Trajectory




2.1 Prologue

Our history is the prologue to the network state.

This is not obvious. Founding a startup society as we’ve described it seems to be about
growing a community, writing code, crowdfunding land, and eventually attaining the
diplomatic recognition to become a network state. What does history have to do with
anything?

The short version is that if a tech company is about technological innovation first, and
company culture second, a startup society is the reverse. It’s about community culture
first, and technological innovation second. And while innovating on technology means
forecasting the future, innovating on culture means probing the past.

But why? Well, for a tech company like SpaceX you start with time-invariant laws of
physics extracted from data, laws that tell you how atoms collide and interact with each
other. The study of these laws allows you to do something that has never been done
before, seemingly proving that history doesn’t matter. But the subtlety is that these
laws of physics encode in highly compressed form the results of innumerable scientific
experiments. You are learning from human experience rather than trying to re-derive
physical law from scratch. To touch Mars, we stand on the shoulders of giants.

For a startup society, we don’t yet have eternal mathematical laws for society.1 History
is the closest thing we have to a physics of humanity. It furnishes many accounts of how
human actors collide and interact with each other. The right course of historical study
encodes, in compressed form, the results of innumerable social experiments. You can
learn from human experience rather than re-deriving societal law from scratch. Learn
some history, so as not to repeat it.

    1Though Peter Turchin is working on it. See his monograph War and Peace and War. Then look
at Ray Dalio’s Principles for a Changing World Order, Strauss and Howe’s The Fourth Turning, Will
and Ariel Durant’s The Lessons of History, and Asimov’s fictional treatment of psychohistory.

                                                                19

21
20                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



That’s a theoretical argument. An observational argument is that we know that the
technological innovation of the Renaissance began by rediscovering history. And we
know that the Founding Fathers cared deeply about history. In both cases, they stepped
forward by drawing from the past. So if you’re a technologist looking to blaze a trail
with a new startup society, that establishes plausibility for why historical study is
important.

The logistical argument is perhaps the most compelling. Think about how much easier
it is to use an iPhone than it was to build Apple from scratch. To consume you can just
click a button, but to produce it’s necessary to know something about how companies
are built. Similarly, it’s one thing to operate as a mere citizen of a pre-built country, and
quite another thing to create one from scratch. To build a new society, it’d be helpful
to have some knowledge of how countries were built in the first place, the logistics of
the process. And this again brings us into the domain of history.


2.1.1 Why History is Crucial

You can’t really learn something without using it. One day of immersion with a new
language beats weeks of book learning. One day of trying to build something with a
programming language beats weeks of theory, too.

In the same way, the history we teach is an applied history: a crucial tool for both
the prospective president of a startup society2 and for their citizens, shareholders, and
staff. It’s something you’ll use on a daily basis. Why?

      History is how you win the argument. Think about the 1619 Project, or the
         grievance studies departments at universities, or even a newspaper “profile” of
         some unfortunate. You might be mining cryptocurrency, but the folks behind
         such things are mining history. That is, many thousands of people are engaged
         full time in “offense archaeology,” the excavation of the recent and distant past
         for some useful incident they can write up to further demoralize their political
         opposition. This is the scholarly version of going through someone’s old tweets.
         It’s weaponized history, history as opposition research. You simply can’t win an
         argument against such people on pure logic alone; you need facts, so you need
         history.

      History determines legality. We denote the exponential improvement in transistor
         density over the postwar period by Moore’s law. We describe the exponential
         decline in pharmaceutical R&D efficiency during the same period as Eroom’s
         law — as Moore’s law in reverse. That is, over the last several decades, the FDA

    2Why do we refer to “startup societies” rather than “network states” here, and throughout this
chapter? Because a startup society is the embryonic form of a network state, just as a startup is
the embryonic form of a public company. Moreover, many startup societies will be able to achieve
their goals without gaining the diplomatic recognition necessary to become a network state, just as
many startup companies can operate indefinitely without going public. See Parallel Societies: Digital
Network Unions to get a sense of what can be done as a purely digital network union, or as a network
archipelago that just buys some land, without the need for full diplomatic recognition.

22
2.1. PROLOGUE                                                                                                                21



         somehow presided over an enormous hike in the costs of drug development even as
         our computers and our knowledge of the human genome vastly improved. Similar
         phenomena can be observed in energy (where energy production has stagnated),
         in aviation (where top speeds have topped out), and in construction (where we
         build slower today than we did seventy years ago).

         Obviously, even articulating Eroom’s law requires detailed knowledge of history,
         knowledge of how things used to be. Less obviously, if we want to change Eroom’s
         law, if we want to innovate in the physical world again, we’ll need history too.

         The reason is that behind every FDA is a thalidomide, just as behind every TSA
         there’s a 9/11 and behind every Sarbanes-Oxley is an Enron. Regulation is dull,
         but the incidents that lead to regulation are anything but dull.

         This history is used to defend ancient regulations; if you change them, people
         will die! As such, to legalize physical innovation you’ll need to become a counter-
         historian. Only when you understand the legitimating history of regulatory agen-
         cies better than their proponents do can you build a superior alternative: a new
         regulatory paradigm capable of addressing both the abuses of the American reg-
         ulatory state and the abuses they claim to prevent.

      History determines morality. Religions start with history lessons. You might
         think of these as made-up histories, but they’re histories all the same. Tales of
         the distant past, fictionalized or not, that describe how humans once behaved -
         and how they should have behaved. There’s a moral to these stories.

         Political doctrines are based on history lessons too. They’re how the establish-
         ment justifies itself. The mechanism for propagating these history lessons is the
         establishment newspaper, wherein most articles aren’t really about true-or-false,
         but good-and-bad. Try it yourself. Just by glancing at a headline from any es-
         tablishment outlet, you can instantly apprehend its moral lesson: x-ism is bad,
         our system of government is good, tech founders are bad, and so on. And if you
         poke one level deeper, if you ask why any of these things is good or bad, you’ll
         again get a history lesson. Because why is x-ism bad? Well, let me educate you
         on some history. . .

         The installation of these moral premises is a zero-sum game. There’s only room
         for so many moral lessons in one society, because a brain’s capacity for moral
         computation is limited. So you get a totally different society if 99% of people
         allocate their limited moral memory to principles like “hard work good, meri-
         tocracy good, envy bad, charity good” than if 99% of people have internalized
         nostrums like “socialism good, civility bad, law enforcement bad, looting good.”3
         You can try to imagine a scenario where these two sets of moral values aren’t in
         direct conflict, but empirically those with the first set of moral values will favor

    3Here are examples of people writing about how socialism is good (Would Socialism Better Our
Lives?), civility is bad (When Civility Is Used As A Cudgel Against People Of Color), law enforcement
is bad (Yes, We Mean Literally Abolish the Police), and looting is good (In Defense of Looting).

23
22                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         an entrepreneurial society and those with the second set of values will not.4

      History is how you develop compelling media. You can make up entirely fictional
         stories, of course. But even fiction frequently has some kind of historical an-
         tecedent. The Lord of the Rings drew on Medieval Europe, Spaghetti Westerns
         pulled from the Wild West, Bond movies were inspired by the Cold War, and
         so on. And certainly the legitimating stories for any political order will draw on
         history.

      History is the true value of cryptocurrency. Bitcoin is worth hundreds of billions
         of dollars because it’s a cryptographically verifiable history of who holds what
         BTC. Read The Truth Machine for a book-length treatment of this concept.

      History tells you who’s in charge. Why did Orwell say that he who controls the
         past controls the future, and that he who controls the present controls the past?
         Because history textbooks are written by the winners. They are authored, sub-
         tly or not, to tell a story of great triumph by the ruling establishment over its
         past enemies. The only history most people in the US know is 1776, 1865, 1945,
         and 1965 - a potted history of revolutions, world wars, and activist movements
         that lead ineluctably to the sunny uplands of greater political equality.5 It’s very
         similar to the history the Soviets taught their children, where all of the past
         was interpreted through the lens of class struggle, bringing Soviet citizens to the
         present day where they were inevitably progressing from the intermediate stage
         of socialism towards. . . communism! Chinese schoolchildren learn a similarly se-
         lective history where the (real) wrongs of the European colonialists and Japanese
         are centered, and those of Mao downplayed. And even any successful startup
         tells a founding story that sands off the rough edges.

         In short, a history textbook gives you a hero’s journey that celebrates the triumph
         of its establishment authors against all odds. Even when a historical treatment
         covers ostensible victims, like Soviet textbooks covering the victimization of the
         proletariat, if you look carefully the ruling class that authors that treatment
         typically justifies itself as the champion of those victims. This is why one of the
         first acts of any conquering regime is to rewrite the textbooks (click those links),
         to tell you who’s in charge.

      History determines your hiring policy. Why are tech companies being lectured by
         media corporations on “diversity”? Is it because those media corporations that are
         20-30 points whiter than tech companies actually deeply care about this? Or is
         it because after the 2009-era collapse of print media revenue, media corporations
         struggled for a business model, found that certain words drove traffic, and then
         doubled down on that - boosting their stock price and bashing their competitors

    4When we write about moral premises, we intentionally omit the preposition for compactness and
for effect. Rather than writing “hard work is good” we write “hard work good.” Why? Dropping
the “is” reflects the underlying cognitive process. In the moment, it’s not really about thought-out
arguments but visceral expression of fundamental moral values.
    5Isn’t this broadly right, you might ask? What’s been left out? Start with the reading list here.

24
2.1. PROLOGUE                                                                                                                23



         in the process?6 After all, if you know a bit more history, you’ll know that the
         New York Times Company (which originates so many of these jeremiads) is an
         organization where the controlling Ochs-Sulzberger family literally profited from
         slavery, blocked women from being publishers, excluded gays from the newsroom
         for decades, ran a succession process featuring only three cis straight white male
         cousins, and ended up with a publisher who just happened to be the son of the
         previous guy.7

         Suppose you’re a founder. Once you know this history, and once all your friends
         and employees and investors know it, and once you know that no purportedly
         brave establishment media corporation would have ever informed you of it in quite
         those words8, you’re outside the matrix. You’ve mentally freed your organization.
         So long as you aren’t running a corporation based on hereditary nepotism where
         the current guy running the show inherits the company from his father’s father’s
         father’s father, you’re more diverse and democratic than the owners of The New
         York Times Company. You don’t need to take lectures from them, from anyone
         in their employ, or really from anyone in their social circle — which includes all
         establishment journalists. You now have the moral authority to hire who you need
         to hire, within the confines of the law, as SpaceX, Shopify, Kraken, and others
         are now doing. And that’s how a little knowledge of history restores control over
         your hiring policy.

      History is how you debug our broken society. Many billions of dollars are spent
         on history in the engineering world. We don’t think about it that way, though.
         We call it doing a post-mortem, looking over the log files, maybe running a so-
         called time-travel debugger to get a reproducible bug. Once we find it, we might
         want to execute an undo, do a git revert, restore from backup, or return to a
         previously known-good configuration.

         Think about what we’re saying: on a micro-scale, knowing the detailed past of the
         system allows us to figure out what had gone wrong. And being able to partially
         rewind the past to progress along a different branch (via a git revert) empow-

    6Lest you think I’m exaggerating how dire the straits were for NYTCO, here’s a quote from former
NYT editor Jill Abramson’s book, Merchants of Truth: “The new digital reality nearly kills two
venerable newspapers [NYT, WaPo] with an aging readership while creating two media behemoths
[BuzzFeed, Vice] with a ballooning and fickle audience of millennials.” The internet posed an existential
threat to NYTCO, so they became BuzzFeed in order to compete with them. What happened next
will astonish you.
    7Here’s      their        history       of        slaveholding     (https://nypost.com/2020/07/18/
the-family-that-owns-the-new-york-times-were-slaveholders-goodwin/),                opposition
to female publishers (https://imgur.com/a/6eu5GxV), bias against gays in the newsroom
(https://twitter.com/heerjeet/status/1270785679744618497), and track record of nepotistic
succession (https://archive.ph/8MKmI#selection-665.0-665.299).
    8A common stratagem is to “report on but not investigate” an issue at another media corporation.
This way they can claim a story was (nominally) covered, but Russell Conjugate it into impotence,
changing enough words to assert the facts were reported while simultaneously removing all emotional
response. The contrast to when they’re actually going for the throat and trying to get someone fired
- as they frequently do to people outside media for trivialities - is stark.

25
24                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         ers us to fix that wrongness. This doesn’t mean throwing away everything and
         returning to the caveman era of a blank git repository, as per either the carica-
         tured traditionalist who wants to “turn back the clock” or the anarcho-primitivist
         who wants to end industrialized civilization. But it does mean rewinding a bit to
         then move forward along a different path9, because progress has both magnitude
         and direction. All these concepts apply to debugging situations at larger scale
         than companies — like societies, or countries.10

You now see why history is useful. A founder of a mere startup company can arguably
scrape by without it, tacitly outsourcing the study of history to those who shape
society’s laws and morality. But a president of a startup society cannot, because a new
society involves moral, social, and legal innovation relative to the old one — and that
requires a knowledge of history.


2.1.2 Why History is Crucial for Startup Societies

We’ve whetted the appetite with some specific examples of why history is useful in
general. Now we’ll describe why it’s specifically useful for startup societies.

We begin by introducing an operationally useful set of tools for thinking about the
past from a bottom-up and top-down perspective: history as written to the ledger, as
opposed to history as written by the winners.

We use these tools to discuss the emergence of a new Leviathan, the Network, a con-
tender for the most powerful force in the world, a true peer (and complement) to both
God and the State as a mechanism for social organization.

And then we’ll bring it all together in the lead-up to the key concept of this chapter:
the idea of the One Commandment, a historically-founded sociopolitical innovation
that draws citizens to a startup society just as a technologically-based commercial
innovation attracts customers to a startup company.

If a startup begins by identifying an economic problem in today’s market and presenting
a technologically-informed solution to that problem in the form of a new company, a
startup society begins by identifying a moral issue in today’s culture and presenting a
historically-informed solution to that issue in the form of a new society.


2.1.3 Why Startup Societies Aren’t Solely About Technology

Wait, why does a startup society have to begin with a moral issue? And why does
the solution to that moral issue need to be historically-informed? Can’t it just be a

    9The repeal of the Volstead Act is one of the cleanest examples. Prohibition was repealed, and
society moved along a different path.
   10Only a few countries, like Estonia and Singapore, are as yet underpinned by a codebase in quite
the same way as a tech company like Google. But more will follow in their footsteps. That’s one
of the theses of this book; see here. And the concept of “recent history as useful for debugging” still
applies even if the equivalent of git revert would be done in paper laws rather than digital code.

26
2.1. PROLOGUE                                                                                                     25


tech-focused community where people solve problems with equations? We’re interested
in Mars and life extension, not dusty stories of defunct cities!

The quick answer comes from Paul Johnson at the 11:00 mark of this talk, where he
notes that early America’s religious colonies succeeded at a higher rate than its for-
profit colonies, because the former had a purpose. The slightly longer answer is that
in a startup society, you’re not asking people to buy a product (which is an economic,
individualistic pitch) but to join a community (which is a cultural, collective pitch).
You’re arguing that the culture of your startup society is better than the surrounding
culture; implicitly, that means there’s some moral deficit in the world that you’re fixing.
History comes into play because you’ll need to (a) write a study of that moral deficit
and (b) draw from the past to find alternative social arrangements where that moral
deficit did not occur. Tech may be part of the solution, and calculations may well be
involved, but the moment you write about any societal problem in depth you’ll find
yourself writing a history of that problem.

For specifics, you can skip ahead to Examples of Parallel Societies — or you can suspend
disbelief for a little bit, keep reading, and trust us that this historical/moral/ethical
angle just might be the missing ingredient to build startup societies, which after all
haven’t yet fully taken off in the modern world.


2.1.4 Applied History for Startup Societies

Here’s the outline of this chapter.

    1. We start with bottom-up history. The section on Microhistory and Macrohistory
        bridges the gap between the trajectory of an isolated, reproducible system and
        the trajectories of millions of interacting human beings. Because both these small
        and large-scale trajectories can now be digitally recorded and quantified, this is
        history as written to the ledger — culminating in the cryptohistory of Bitcoin.

    2. We next discuss top-down history. This is history as written by the winners,
        history as conceptualized by what Tyler Cowen calls the Base-Raters, history
        that justifies the current order and proclaims it stable and inevitable. It is a
        theory of Political Power vs. Technological Truth.

    3. We then talk about the history of power, giving names to the forces we just de-
        scribed by identifying the three candidates for most powerful force in the world:
        God, State, and Network. Framing things in terms of three prime movers rather
        than one allows us to generalize beyond purely God-centered religions to under-
        stand the Leviathan-centered doctrines that implicitly underpin modern society.

    4. We apply this to the history of power struggles. With the God/State/Network
        lens, we can understand the Blue/Red and Tech-vs-Media conflicts in a different
        way as a multi-sided struggle between People of God, People of the State, and
        People of the Network.

    5. We go through how the People of the State have used their power to distort recent

27
26                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         and distant history, and how the Network is newly rectifying this distortion in
         “If the News is Fake, Imagine History.”

    6. Having shown the degree to which history has been distorted, and thereby dis-
         placed the (implicit) historical narrative in which the arc of history bends to the
         ineluctable victory of the US establishment11, we discuss several alternative theo-
         ries of past and future in our section on Fragmentation, Frontier, Fourth Turning,
         and Future Is Our Past. These theses don’t describe a clean progressive victory
         on every axis, but instead a set of cycles, hairpin turns, and mirror images, a set of
         historical trajectories far more complex than the narrative of linear inevitability
         smuggled in through textbooks and mass media.

    7. We next turn our attention to left and right, which are confusing concepts in
         a realigning time, in Left is the new Right is the new Left. Sorry! We can’t
         avoid politics anymore. Startup societies aren’t purely about technology. But
         please note that for the most part this section isn’t the same old pabulum around
         current events. We do contend that you need a theory of left and right to build
         a startup society, but that doesn’t mean just picking a side.

         Why? While a political consumer has to pick one of a few party platforms off
         the menu, a political founder can do something different: ideology construction.
         To inform this, we’ll show how left and right have swapped sides through history,
         and how any successful mass movement has both a revolutionary left component
         and a ruling right component.

    8. Finally, all of this builds up to the payoff: the One Commandment. Using the
         terminology we just introduced, we can rattle it off in a few paragraphs. (If the
         following is opaque in any way, read the chapter, then come back and re-read this
         part.)

         If history is not pre-determined to bend in one direction, if the current establish-
         ment may experience dramatic disruption in the form of the Fragmentation and
         Fourth Turning, if its power actually arose from the expanding frontier rather
         than the expanding franchise, if history is somehow running in reverse as per
         the Future Is Our Past thesis, if the revolutionary and ruling classes are in fact
         switching sides, if the new Leviathan that is the Network is indeed rising above
         the State, and if the internal American conflicts can be seen not as policy dis-
         putes but as holy wars, as clashes of Leviathans. . . then the assumption of the
         Base-Raters that all will proceed as it always has is quite incorrect! But rather
         than admit this incorrectness, they’ll attempt to use political power to suppress
         technological truth.

   11The concept of historical inevitability is found in both American democracy and Soviet commu-
nism, in many religions, and in fictional settings like Ozymandias. It’s even seen in mirror image
in works like the Sovereign Individual. The way to understand this is that the “inevitabilists” are
typically identifying a real and powerful trend, without modeling Sorosian reflexivity and individual
initiative. That is, there’s a reflexive backlash to any trend (“the enemy also gets a move”), and there
are also individuals who can start new trends.

28
2.1. PROLOGUE                                                                                                                27



         The founder’s counter is cryptohistory and the startup society. We now have
         a history no establishment can easily corrupt, the cryptographically verifiable
         history pioneered by Bitcoin and extended via crypto oracles. We also have a
         theory of historical feasibility, history as a trajectory rather than an inevitability,
         the idea that the desirable future will only occur if you put in individual effort.
         But what exactly is the nature of that desirable future?

         After all, many groups differ with the old order but also with each other — so a
         blanket solution won’t work. And could well be resisted. That’s where the One
         Commandment comes in.

         As context, the modern person is often morally reticent but politically evange-
         listic. They hesitate to talk about what is moral or immoral, because it’s not
         their place to say what’s right. Yet when it comes to politics, this diffidence is
         frequently replaced by overbearing confidence in how others must live, coupled
         with an enthusiasm for enforcing their beliefs at gunpoint if necessary.

         In between this zero and 1, in between eschewing moral discussion entirely and
         imposing a full-blown political doctrine, in this final section we propose a one: a
         one commandment. Start a new society with its own moral code, based on your
         study of history, and recruit people that agree with you to populate it.12 We’re
         not saying you need to come up with your own new Ten Commandments, mind
         you — but you do need One Commandment to establish the differentiation of a
         new startup society.

         Concrete examples of possible One Commandments include “24/7 internet bad”
         (which leads to a Digital Sabbath society), or “carbs bad” (which leads to a Keto
         Kosher society), or “traditional Christianity good” (which leads to a Benedict
         Option society), or “life extension good” (which leads to a post-FDA society).

         You might think these One Commandments sound either trivial or unrealistically
         ambitious, but in that respect they’re similar to tech; the pitch of “140 charac-
         ters” sounded trivial and the pitch of “reusable rockets” seemed unrealistic, but
         those resulted in Twitter and SpaceX respectively. The One Commandment is
         also similar to tech in another respect: it focuses a startup society on a single
         moral innovation, just like a tech company is about a focused technoeconomic
         innovation.

         That is, as we’ll see, each One Commandment-based startup society is premised
         on deconstructing the establishment’s history in one specific area, erecting a re-
         placement narrative in its place with a new One Commandment, then proving the
         socioeconomic value of that One Commandment by using it to attract subscriber-
         citizens. For example, if you can attract 100k subscribers to your Keto Kosher
         society through deeply researched historical studies on the obesity epidemic, and
         then show that they’ve lost significant weight as a consequence, you’ve proven

   12It’s entirely consensual. If people like the society, they join as a subscriber; if they don’t like it
after joining, they cancel their subscription.

29
28                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         the establishment deeply wrong in a key area. That’ll either drive them to reform
         — or not reform, in which case you attract more citizens.

         Akey point is that we can apply all the techniques of startup companies to startup
         societies. Financing, attracting subscribers, calculating churn, doing customer
         support — there’s a playbook for all of that. It’s just Society-as-a-Service, the
         new SaaS.

         In parallel, other startup societies are likewise critiquing by building, draining
         citizens away from the establishment with their own historically-informed One
         Commandments, and thereby driving change on other dimensions. Finally, dif-
         ferent successful changes can be copied and merged together, such that the sec-
         ond generation of startup societies starts differentiating from the establishment
         by two, three, or N commandments. This is a vision for peaceful, parallelized,
         historically-driven reform of a broken society.

Ok! I know those last few paragraphs involved some heavy sledding, but come back
and reread them after going through the chapter. The main point of our little preview
here was to make the case that history is an applied subject — and that you can’t start
a new society without it.

Without a genuine moral critique of the establishment, without an ideological root net-
work supported by history, your new society is at best a fancy Starbucks lounge, a gated
community that differs only in its amenities, a snack to be eaten by the establishment
at its leisure, a soulless nullity with no direction save consumerism.13

But with such a critique — with the understanding that the establishment is morally
wanting, with a focused articulation of how exactly it falls short, with a One Com-
mandment that others can choose to follow, and with a vision of the historical past
that underpins your new startup society much as a vision of the technological future
underpins a new startup company —you’re well on your way.

You might even start to see a historical whitepaper floating in front of you, the scholarly
critique that draws your first 100 subscribers, the founding document you publish to
kick off your startup society.

Now let’s equip you with the tools to write it.


   13WeWork deserves a mention here. I actually respect what Adam Neumann built; it’s a decent
product that people used, which is insanely difficult to build, even if it didn’t work out as an investment.
The issue with a WeWork, though, is that it wasn’t really a community. The acid test is that you
couldn’t leave your laptop down in aWeWork, or have a conversation in a common area. The other
people there were strangers. Yes, you could get enclosed offices within WeWorks, but the common
areas were more like an airport lounge or Starbucks than a community. In short, you need both a
physical membrane boundary and an ideological moral boundary in order to actually have a proper
community.

30
2.2. MICROHISTORY AND MACROHISTORY                                                      29



2.2 Microhistory and Macrohistory

In the bottom-up view, history is written to the ledger. If everything that happened gets
faithfully recorded, history is then just the analysis of the log files. To understand this
view we’ll discuss the idea of history as a trajectory. Then we’ll introduce the concepts
of microhistory and macrohistory, by analogy to microeconomics and macroeconomics.
Finally, we’ll unify all this with the new concept of cryptohistory.


2.2.1 History as a Cryptic Epic of Twisting Trajectories

What happens when you propel an object into the air? The first thing that comes to
mind is the trajectory of a ball. Throw it and witness its arc. Just a simple parabola,
an exercise in freshman physics. But there are more complicated trajectories.

      A boomerang flies forward and comes back to the origin.

      Acharged particle in a constant magnetic field is subject to a force at right angles,
        and moves in a circle.

      A rocket with sufficient fuel can escape the earth’s atmosphere rather than coming
        back down.

      A curveball, subject to the Magnus effect, can twist in mid-air en route to its
        destination.

      A projectile launched into a sufficiently thick gelatin decelerates without ever
        hitting the ground.

      A powered drone can execute an arbitrarily complicated flight path, mimicking
        that of a bumblebee or helix.

So, how a system evolves with time — its trajectory — can be complex and counter-
intuitive, even for something small. This is a good analogy for history. If the flight
path of a single inanimate object can be this surprising, think about the dynamics of
a massive multi-agent system of highly animate people. Imagine billions of humans
springing up on the map, forming clusters, careening into each other, creating more
humans, and throwing off petabytes of data exhaust the whole way. That’s history.

And the timeframes involved make it tough to study. The rock you throw into the air
doesn’t take decades to play out its flight path. Humans do. So a historical observer
can literally die before seeing the consequences of an action.

Moreover, the subjects of the study don’t want to be studied. A mere rock isn’t a
stealth bomber. It has neither the motive nor the means to deceive you about its flight
path. Humans do. The people under the microscope are fogging the lens.

So: the scale is huge, the timeframe is long, and the measurements aren’t just noisy
but intentionally corrupted.

31
30                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


We can encode all of this into a phrase: history is a cryptic epic of twisting trajectories.
Cryptic, because the narrators are unreliable and often intentionally misleading. Epic,
because the timescales are so long that you have to consciously sample beyond your
own experience and beyond any human lifetime to see patterns. Twisting, because
there are curves, cycles, collapses, and non-straightforward patterns. And trajectories,
because history is ultimately about the time evolution of human beings, which maps to
the physical idea of a dynamical system, of a set of particles progressing through time.

Put that together, and it wipes out both the base-rater’s view that today’s order will
remain basically stable over the short-term, and the complementary view of a long-term
“the arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.” It also contests
the idea that the fall of the bourgeoisie “and the victory of the proletariat are equally
inevitable,” or that “no two countries on a Bitcoin standard will go to war with each
other,” or even that technological progress has been rapid, so we can assume it will
continue and society will not collapse.

Those phrases come from different ideologies, but each of them verbally expresses the
clean parabolic arc of the rock. History isn’t really like that at all. It’s much more
complicated. There are certainly trends, and those phrases do identify real trends, but
there is also pushback to those trends, counterforces that arise in response to applied
forces, syntheses that form from theses and antitheses, and outright collapses. Complex
dynamics, in other words.

And how do we study complex dynamical systems? The first task is to measure.


2.2.2 Microhistory is the History of Reproducible Systems

Microhistory is the history of a reproducible system, one which has few enough vari-
ables that it can be reset and replayed from the beginning in a series of controlled
experiments. It is history as a quantitative trajectory, history as a precise log of mea-
surements. For example, it could be the record of all past values of a state space vector
in a dynamical system, the account of all moves made by two deterministic algorithms
playing chess against each other, or the chronicle of all instructions executed by a
journaling file system after being restored to factory settings.

Microhistory is an applied subject, where accurate historical measurement is of di-
rect technical and commercial importance. We can see this with technologies like the
Kalman filter, which was used for steering the spaceship used in the moon landing.
You can see the full technical details here, but roughly speaking the Kalman filter uses
past measurements x[t 1]; x[t   2]; x[t    3] to inform the estimate of a system’s current
state x[t], the action that should be taken u[t], and the corresponding prediction of the
future state x[t + 1] should that action be taken. For example, it uses past velocity,
direction headings, fuel levels, and the like to recommend how a space shuttle should be
steered at the current timestep. Crucially, if the microhistory is not accurate enough, if
the confidence intervals around each measurement are too wide, or if (say) the velocity
estimate is wrong altogether, then the Kalman Filter does not work and Apollo doesn’t

32
2.2. MICROHISTORY AND MACROHISTORY                                                                  31



happen.

At a surface level, the Kalman filter resembles the kind of time series analysis that’s
common in finance. The key difference is that the Kalman filter is used on reproducible
systems while finance is typically a non-reproducible system. If you’re using the Kalman
filter to guide a drone from point A to point B, but you have a bug in your code and
the drone crashes, you can simply pick up the drone14, put it back on the launch pad
at point A, and try again. Because you can repeat the experiment over and over, you
can eventually get very precise measurements and a functioning guidance algorithm.
That’s a reproducible system.

In finance, however, you usually can’t just keep re-running a trading algorithm that
makes money and get the same result. Eventually your counterparties will adapt and
get wise. A key difference relative to our drone example is the presence of animate
objects (other humans) who won’t always do the same thing given the same input.15
In fact, they can often be adversarial, observing and reacting to your actions, inten-
tionally confounding your predictions, especially if they can profit from doing so. Past
performance is no guarantee of future results in finance, as opposed to physics. Unlike
the situation with the drone, a market isn’t a reproducible system.

Microhistory thus has its limits, but it’s an incredibly powerful concept. If we have
good enough measurements on the past, then we have a better prediction of the future
in an extremely literal sense. If we have tight confidence intervals on our measurements
of the past, if the probability distribution P(x[t                1]) is highly peaked, then we get
correspondingly tight confidence intervals on the present P(x[t]) and the future P(x[t+
1]). Conversely, the more uncertainty about your past, the more confused you are about
where you’re from and where you’re going, the more likely your rocket will crash. It’s
Orwell more literally than he ever expected: he who controls the past controls the
future, in the direct sense that he has better control theory. Only a civilization with a
strong capacity for accurate microhistory could ever make it to the moon.

This is a powerful analogy for civilization. A group of people who doesn’t know who
they are or where they came from won’t ever make it to the moon, let alone to Mars.

Can we make it more than an analogy?


2.2.3 Macrohistory is the History of Non-Reproducible Sys-
               tems

Macrohistory is the history of a non-reproducible system, one which has too many
variables to easily be reset and replayed from the beginning. It is history that is not

   14Yes, it could break. If so, use an identical one from the same factory.
   15Functional programming aficionados will recognize this as being similar to the difference between
pure and impure functions. A pure function like sin(x) always returns the same output given the
same input. An impure function like number_of_users() does not, typically because there is some
external state variable such as a database.

33
32                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



directly amenable to controlled experiment. At small scale, that’s the unpredictable
flow of a turbulent fluid; at very large scale, it’s the history of humanity.

We think of macrohistory as being on a continuum with microhistory. Why? We’ll
make a few points and then tie them all together.

      First, science progresses by taking phenomena formerly thought of as non-
         reproducible (and hence unpredictable) systems, isolating the key variables, and
         turning them into reproducible (and hence predictable) systems. For example,
         Koch’s postulates include the idea of transmission pathogenesis, which turned
         the vague concept of infection via “miasma” into a reproducible phenomenon: ex-
         pose a mouse to a specific microorganism in a laboratory setting and an infection
         arises, but not otherwise.

      Second, and relatedly, science progresses by improved instrumentation, by better
         recordkeeping. Star charts enabled celestial navigation. Johann Balmer’s doc-
         umentation of the exact spacing of hydrogen’s emission spectra led to quantum
         mechanics. Gregor Mendel’s careful counting of pea plants led to modern genet-
         ics. Things we counted as simply beyond human ken — the stars, the atom, the
         genome —became things humans can comprehend by simply counting.

      Third, how do we even know anything about the history of ancient Rome or
         Egypt or Medieval Europe? From artifacts and written records. Thousands of
         years ago, people were scratching customer reviews into a stone tablet, one of the
         first tablet-based apps. We know who Abelard and Heloise were from their letters
         to each other. We know what the Romans were like from what they recorded. To
         a significant extent, what we know about history is what we’ve recovered from
         what people wrote down.

      Fourth, today, we have digital documentation on an unprecedented scale. We
         have billions of people using social media each day for almost a decade now.
         We also have billions of phones taking daily photographs and videos. We have
         countless data feeds of instruments. And we have massive hard drives to store it
         all. So, if reckoned on the basis of raw bytes, we likely record more information
         in a day than all of humanity recorded up to the year 1900. It is by far the most
         comprehensive log of human activity we’ve ever had.

We can now see the continuum16 between macrohistory and microhistory. We are col-
lecting the kinds of precise, quantitative, microhistorical measurements that typically
led to the emergence of a new science. . . but at the scale of billions of people, and going
into our second decade.

   16This is similar to the continuum between microeconomics and macroeconomics (disputed by the
Keynesians, who say that governments aren’t households), or the continuum between natural intelli-
gence and artificial intelligence (disputed by those who think human intelligence is sui generis, rather
than something that was gradually formed by an evolutionary process and could be formed through a
computational process), or the continuum between microevolution and macroevolution (disputed by
those who think that sequence evolution isn’t species evolution, or [more reasonably] that abiogenesis
isn’t yet fully experimentally demonstrated).

34
2.2. MICROHISTORY AND MACROHISTORY                                                      33


So, another term for “Big Data” should be “Big History.” All data is a record of
past events, sometimes the immediate past, sometimes the past of months or years
ago, sometimes (in the case of Google Books or the Digital Michelangelo project) the
past of decades or centuries ago. After all, what’s another word for data storage in a
computer? Memory. Memory, as in the sense of human memory, and as in the sense
of history.

That memory is commercially valuable. A technologist who neglects history ensures
their users will get exploited. Proof? Consider reputation systems. Any scaled market-
place has them. The history of an Uber driver or rider’s on-platform behavior partially
predicts their future behavior. Without years of star ratings, without memories of past
actions of millions of people, these platforms would be wrecked by fraud. Macrohistory
makes money.

This is just one example. There are huge short and long-term incentives to record all
this data, all this microhistory and macrohistory. And future historians17 will study
our digital log to understand what we were like as a civilization.


2.2.4 Bitcoin’s Blockchain Is a Technology for Robust Macro-
              history

There are some catches to the concept of digital macrohistory, though: silos, bots,
censors, and fakes. As we’ll show, Bitcoin and its generalizations provide a powerful
way to solve these issues.

First, let’s understand the problems of silos, bots, censors, and fakes. The macrohis-
torical log is largely siloed across different corporate servers, on the premises of Twitter
and Facebook and Google. The posts are typically not digitally signed or cryptograph-
ically timestamped, so much of the content is (or could be) from bots rather than
humans. Inconvenient digital history can be deleted by putting sufficient pressure on
centralized social media companies or academic publishers, censoring true information
in the name of taking down “disinformation,” as we’ve already seen. And the advent
of AI allows highly realistic fakes of the past and present to be generated. If we’re not
careful, we could drown in fake data.

So, how could someone in the future (or even the present) know if a particular event
they didn’t directly observe was real? The Bitcoin blockchain gives one answer. It is
the most rigorous form of history yet known to man, a history that is technically and
economically resistant to revision. Thanks to a combination of cryptographic primitives
and financial incentives, it is very challenging to falsify the who, what, and when of
transactions written to the Bitcoin blockchain.

Who initiated this transfer, what amount of Bitcoin did they send, what metadata
did they attach to the transaction, and when did they send it? That information is
recorded in the blockchain and sufficient to give a bare bones history of the entire

  17Assuming we make it past the Great Filter.

35
34                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


Bitcoin economy since 2009. And if you sum up that entire history to the present day,
you also get the values of how much BTC is held by each address. It’s an immediatist
model of history, where the past is not even past - it’s with us at every second.

In a little more detail, why is the Bitcoin blockchain so resistant to the rewriting
of history? To falsify the “who” of a single transaction you’d need to fake a digital
signature, to falsify the “what” you’d need to break a hash function, to falsify the
“when” you’d need to corrupt a timestamp, and you’d need to do this while somehow not
breaking all the other records cryptographically connected to that transaction through
the mechanism of composed block headers.

Some call the Bitcoin blockchain a timechain, because unlike many other blockchains,
its proof-of-work mechanism and difficulty adjustment ensure a statistically regular
time interval between blocks, crucial to its function as a digital history.

(I recognize that these concepts and some of what follows is technical. Our whirlwind
tour may provoke either familiar head-nodding or confused head-scratching. If you want
more detail, we’ve linked definitions of each term, but fully explaining them is beyond
the scope of this work. However, see The Truth Machine for a popular treatment and
Dan Boneh’s Cryptography course for technical detail.)

Nevertheless, here’s the point for even a nontechnical reader: the Bitcoin blockchain
gives a history that’s hard to falsify. Unless there’s an advance in quantum computing,
a breakthrough in pure math, a heretofore unseen bug in the code, or a highly expensive
51% attack that probably only China could muster, it is essentially infeasible to rewrite
the history of the Bitcoin blockchain — or anything written to it. And even if such
an event does happen, it wouldn’t be an instantaneous burning of Bitcoin’s Library
of Alexandria. The hash function could be replaced with a quantum-safe version, or
another chain robust to said attack could take Bitcoin’s place, and back up the ledger
of all historical Bitcoin transactions to a new protocol.

With that said, we are not arguing that Bitcoin is infallible. We are arguing that it
is the best technology yet invented for recording human history. And if the concept
of cryptocurrency can endure past the invention of quantum decryption, we will likely
think of the beginning of cryptographically verifiable history as on par with the begin-
ning of written history millennia ago. Future societies may think of the year 2022 AD
as the year 13 AS, with “After Satoshi” as the new “Anno Domini,” and the block clock
as the new universal time.


2.2.5 The Bitcoin Blockchain Can Record Non-Bitcoin Events

For the price of a single transaction, the Bitcoin blockchain can be generalized to
provide a cryptographically verifiable record of any historical event, a proof-of-existence.

For example, perhaps there is some off-chain event of significant importance where you
want to store it for the record. Suppose it’s the famous photo of Stalin with his cronies,
because you anticipate the rewriting of history. The proof-of-existence technique we’re

36
2.2. MICROHISTORY AND MACROHISTORY                                                                  35



about to describe wouldn’t directly be able to prove the data of the file was real, but
you could establish the metadata on the file — the who, what, and when — to a future
observer.

Specifically, given a proof-of-existence, a future observer would be able to confirm that
a given digital signature (who) put a given hash of a photo (what) on chain at a given
time (when). That future observer might well suspect the photo could still be fake, but
they’d know it’d have to be faked at that precise time by the party controlling that
wallet. And the evidence would be on-chain years before the airbrushed official photo
of Stalin was released. That’s implausible under many models. Who’d fake something
so specific years in advance? It’d be more likely the official photo was fake than the
proof-of-existence.

So, let’s suppose that this limited level of proof was worth it to you. You are willing
to pay such that future generations can see an indelible record of a bit of history. How
would you get that proof onto the Bitcoin blockchain?

The way you’d do this is by organizing your arbitrarily large external dataset (a photo,
or something much larger than that) into a Merkle tree, calculating a string of fixed
length called a Merkle root, and then writing that to the Bitcoin blockchain through
OP_RETURN. This furnishes a tool for proof-of-existence for any digital file.

You can do this as a one-off for a single piece of data, or as a periodic backup for any
non-Bitcoin chain. So you could, in theory, put a digital summary of many gigabytes
of data from another chain on the Bitcoin blockchain every ten minutes for the price
of a single BTC transaction, thereby proving it existed. This would effectively “back
up” this other blockchain and give it some of the irreversibility properties of Bitcoin.
Call this kind of chain a subchain.

By analogy to the industrial use of gold, this type of “industrial” use case of a Bitcoin
transaction may turn out to be quite important. A subchain with many millions of off-
Bitcoin transactions every ten minutes could likely generate enough economic activity
to easily pay for a single Bitcoin transaction.18

   18But how could those non-Bitcoin chains be cryptographically verifiable if they aren’t based on
proof-of-work, or are transitioning away? The short answer is that even a proof-of-stake chain can
have its chaintip hashed to every Bitcoin block via OP_RETURN. At roughly 10 minutes between blocks,
that’s 144 transactions per day or 52,560 transactions per year. Though Bitcoin transaction fees may
rise over time, so far they’ve been as low as one USD or as high as sixty USD, so this would cost
something between 52k to 3M USD per year in Bitcoin fees if you wanted to “back up to Bitcoin”
every 10 minutes. If you wanted to do it only every hour, it’d be 1/6 this cost, and at once per day
it’d be 1/144 this cost. These kinds of prices are affordable for any external chain that is handling
significant value. A group called Veriblock did some research on this, which they called proof-of-proof,
and shipped a functioning product which at one point was a significant fraction of so-called OP_RETURN
transactions, but has now been discontinued as has USDT’s Omni-Chain.
   Some people are against the use of OP_RETURN in this way, but it’s a feature of Bitcoin that can be
used without anyone’s permission. So I think it’s quite likely that high stakes proof-of-stake chains get
hashed to Bitcoin in some form. This addresses the issue Vitalik Buterin has termed weak subjectivity,
where some information external to the blockchain needs to be used to figure out which chain is the
right one to follow - rather than the wholly objective measure of Bitcoin, which says “the chain with

37
36                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



And as more people try to use the Bitcoin blockchain, given its capacity limits, it might
turn out that only industrial use cases like this could afford to pay sufficient fees in this
manner, as direct individual use of the Bitcoin blockchain could become expensive.

So, that means we can use the proof-of-existence technique to log arbitrary data to the
Bitcoin blockchain, including data from other chains.


2.2.6 Blockchains Can Record the History of an Economy and
               Society

We just zoomed in to detail how you’d log a single transaction to the Bitcoin blockchain
to prove any given historical event happened. Now let’s zoom out.

As noted, the full scope of what the Bitcoin blockchain represents is nothing less than
the history of an entire economy. Every transaction is recorded since t = 0. Every
fraction of a BTC is accounted for, down to one hundred millionth of a Bitcoin. Nothing
is lost.

Except, of course, for all the off-chain data that accompanies a transaction - like the
identity of the sender and receiver, the reason for their transaction, the SKU of any
goods sold, and so on. There are usually good reasons for these things to remain
private, or partially private, so you might think this is a feature.

The problem is that Bitcoin’s design is a bit of a tweener, as it doesn’t actually ensure
that public transactions remain private. Indeed there are companies like Elliptic and
Chainalysis devoted entirely to the deanonymization of public Bitcoin addresses and
transactions. The right model of the history of the Bitcoin economy is that it’s in
a hybrid state, where the public has access to the raw transaction data, but private
actors (like Chainalysis and Elliptic) have access to much more information and can
deanonymize many transactions.

Moreover, Bitcoin can only execute Bitcoin transactions, rather than all the other kinds
of digital operations you could facilitate with more blockspace. But people are working
on all of this.

      Zero-knowledge technology like ZCash, Ironfish, and Tornado Cash allow on-chain
         attestation of exactly what people want to make public and nothing more.

the most accumulated chainwork is the correct chain to follow.”
   Such an objective measure would be helpful in the event that many real-seeming blockchains are
put out on the internet at the same time by a motivated attacker who also has control over social
media (like China), such that you’d need to pick the right chain from the head of this hydra with only
your trusty computer. With something like proof-of-proof, you could first orient by finding the correct
Bitcoin blockchain amidst this mess, and then use it to find the proper heads of all other chains.
   The cryptopolitical implications of doing something like this are humorous, because some Bitcoin
Maximalists don’t like the use of OP_RETURN, and some users of non-Bitcoin chains want to have their
own fully standalone ecosystems, but the combination here would produce (a) a steady stream of fees
for Bitcoin miners, helping Bitcoin’s security budget and (b) give a last-resort backup plan for the
security of other chains.

38
2.2. MICROHISTORY AND MACROHISTORY                                                                  37



      Smart contract chains like Ethereum and Solana extend the capability of what
         can be done on chain, at the expense of higher complexity.

      Decentralized social networks like Mirror and DeSo put social events on chain
         alongside financial transactions.

      Naming systems like the Ethereum Name Service (ENS) and Solana Name Service
         (SNS) attach identity to on-chain transactions.

      Incorporation systems allow the on-chain representation of corporate abstrac-
         tions above the level of a mere transaction, like financial statements or even full
         programmable company-equivalents like DAOs.

      New proof techniques like proof-of-solvency and proof-of-location extend the set of
         things one can cryptographically prove on chain from the basic who/what/when
         of Bitcoin.

      Cryptocredentials, Non-Fungible Tokens (NFTs), Non-Transferable Fungibles
         (NTFs), and Soulbounds allow the representation of non-financial data on chain,
         like diplomas or endorsements.

What’s the point? If blockspace continues to increase, ever more of the digital history
of our economy and society will be recorded on chain, in a cryptographically verifiable
yet privacy-preserving way. The analogy is to the increase in bandwidth, which now
allows us to download a megabyte of JavaScript on a mobile phone to run a webapp,
an unthinkable indulgence in the year 2000.

This is a breakthrough in digital macrohistory that addresses the issues of silos, bots,
censors, and fakes. Public blockchains aren’t siloed in corporations, but publicly acces-
sible. They provide new tools, like staking and ENS-style identity, that allow separation
of bots from humans. They can incorporate many different proof techniques, including
proof-of-existence and more, to address the problem of deepfakes. And they can have
very strong levels of censorship resistance by paying transaction fees to hash their chain
state to the Bitcoin blockchain.


2.2.7 Cryptohistory is Cryptographically Verifiable Macrohis-
               tory

We can now see how the expansion of blockspace is on track to give us a cryptographi-
cally verifiable macrohistory, or cryptohistory for short.

This is the log of everything that billions of people choose to make public: every
decentralized tweet, every public donation, every birth and death certificate, every
marriage and citizenship record, every crypto domain registration, every merger and
acquisition of an on-chain entity, every financial statement, every public record — all
digitally signed, timestamped, and hashed in freely available public ledgers.19

   19All of this can be hashed to the Bitcoin blockchain as well via the Merkle root technique previously
described, for the price of just one (1) Bitcoin transaction. That won’t solve the so-called data

39
38                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



The thing is, essentially all of human behavior has a digital component now. Every
purchase and communication, every ride in an Uber, every swipe of a keycard, and
every step with a Fitbit — all of that produces digital artifacts.

So, in theory you could eventually download the public blockchain of a network state to
replay the entire cryptographically verified history of a community.18 That’s the future
of public records, a concept that is to the paper-based system of the legacy state what
paper records were to oral records.

It’s also a vision for what macrohistory will become. Not a scattered letter from an
Abelard here and a stone tablet from an Egyptian there. But a full log, a cryptohis-
tory. The unification of microhistory and macrohistory in one giant cryptographically
verifiable dataset. We call this indelible, computable, digital, authenticatable history
the ledger of record.

This concept is foundational to the network state. And it can be used for good or ill.
In decentralized form, the ledger of record allows an individual to resist the Stalinist
rewriting of the past. It is the ultimate expression of the bottom-up view of history
as what’s written to the ledger. But you can also imagine a bastardized form, where
the cryptographic checks are removed, the read/write access is centralized, and the
idea of a total digital history is used by a state to create an NSA/China-like system of
inescapable, lifelong surveillance.20

This in turn leads us to a top-down view of history, the future trajectory we want to
avoid, where political power is used to defeat technological truth.



2.3 Political Power and Technological Truth

In the top-down view, history is written by the winners. It is about political power
triumphing over technological truth.

Why does power care about the past? Because the morality of society is derived
from its history. When the Chinese talk about Western imperialism, they aren’t just
talking about some forgettable dust-up in the South China Sea, but how that relates to
generations of colonialism and oppression, to the Eight Nations Alliance and the Opium
Wars and so on. And when you see someone denounced on American Twitter as an
x-ist, history is likewise being brought to bear. Again, why are they bad? Because of
our history of x-ism. . .

As such, when you listen to a regime’s history, which you are doing every time you
hear its official organs praise or denounce someone, you should listen critically.

availability problem, but it will solve the proof-of-existence problem.
   20This would be to the ledger of record what a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC) is to
Bitcoin; something that takes some of the concepts, but takes away the freedom. As we’ll get to, these
correspond to benign and malign versions of the Network/State synthesis respectively.

40
2.3. POLITICAL POWER AND TECHNOLOGICAL TRUTH                                  39



2.3.1 Political Power as the Driving Force of History

How do the authorities use history? What techniques are they using? It’s not just a
random collection of names and dates. They have proven techniques for sifting through
the archives, for staffing a retinue of heros and villains from the past, for distilling the
documents into (politically) useful parables. Here are two of them.

      Political determinist model: history is written by the winners. People have heard
        this saying, but taking it seriously has profound implications. For example, who-
        ever claims to be writing the “first draft of history” is therefore one of the win-
        ners. For another, history is what’s useful to the regime. A classic example is
        Katyn Forest: the admission that the Soviets did it would have delegitimized
        their postwar control over Poland during the 1945-1991 period, but once the
        USSR collapsed the truth could be revealed.

      Political mascot model: history is written by winners pretending to be acting
        on behalf of losers. This is a variant of the political determinist model, also
        known as “offense archaeology,” and practiced by the modern American, Chinese,
        and Russian establishments — all of whom portray themselves as victims. The
        technique is to pick a mascot that the state claims to champion, such as the Soviet
        Union’s proletariat, and then go through history to find the worst examples of
        the state’s current rival doing something bad to them.

        Take these real events, put them on the front page, and ensure everyone knows
        of them. Conversely, ensure off-narrative events are ignored or suppressed as
        taboo. Again taking the USSR as a case study, this involved finding endless (real!)
        examples of Western capitalists screwing the working class, and suppressing the
        worse (also real!) instances of Soviet communists gulaging their working class, as
        well as cases of the working class itself behaving badly. Generalization to other
        contexts is left as an exercise for the reader, but here’s a Russian example of what
        an American would call “responsibility to protect” (R2P).

These techniques are used to write history that favors a state. Here are more examples:

      CCP China: Today’s Chinese media covers the Eight-Nations Alliance, the
        Opium Wars, and the like exhaustively in its domestic output, as these events
        show the malevolence of the European colonialists — who literally fought wars to
        keep China subjugated and addicted to heroin. Their domestic history does not
        mention the Uighurs, Tiananmen, and the like domestically. Xi’s CCP did stress
        the domestic problem of corruption via the “Tigers and Flies” campaign. . . but
        that’s in part because the anti-corruption campaign was politically useful against
        his internal enemies, and seemed not to ensnare his allies.

      US Establishment: Today’s US establishment covers 6/4/1989 and the 2022
        Russo-Ukrainian War heavily, because they are real events that make China and
        Russia look bad and the US look good. It does not mention the 1900 Eight-
        Nations Alliance (when the US helped invade China with a “coalition of the will-

41
40                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


        ing” to defend European imperialism) or the 1932 Ukrainian Holodomor (when
        The New York Times Company’s Walter Duranty helped Soviet Russia choke out
        Ukraine) as these cut in the opposite direction.

        The current US narrative also does not stress the Cultural Revolution (which
        bears too close a resemblance to present day America), or Western journalists
        like Edgar Snow who helped Mao come to power, or the full ugly history of
        American support for Russian and Chinese communism. This isn’t simply a
        matter of the age of events — after all, regime media goes back further in time
        when convenient, distorting events from 1619 for today’s headlines, yet somehow
        their time machine stutters on the years 1932 or 1900. In modern America, as in
        modern China, the history you hear about is the history the establishment finds
        to be politically useful against its internal and external rivals.

      The British Empire: The British in both WW1 and WW2 understandably em-
        phasized the evils of Germany, but not so much the evils of their ally Russia, or
        their own evils during the Opium Wars, or the desire for the Indian subcontinent
        to breathe free, and so on. (This one is almost too easy as the UK is no longer
        a contender for heavyweight champion of the world, so no one is offended when
        someone points out its past self-serving inconsistencies. Indeed, documenting the
        UK’s sins is now a cottage industry for Britain’s virtue signalers, as beating up
        on a beaten empire is far easier than tackling the taboos of a still live one.)

Point being: once you get your head out of the civilization you grew up in, and look at
things comparatively, the techniques of political history become obvious. One of those
techniques deserves special mention, and that’s a peacetime version of the “atrocity
story”:

        One of the most time-honored techniques to mobilize public animosity
        against the enemy and to justify military action is the atrocity story. This
        technique, says Professor Lasswell, has been used “with unvarying success
        in every conflict known to man.”

The concept is as useful in peacetime as it is in war. Why? Because states get their
people hyped up to fight wars by stressing the essentially defensive nature of what they
are doing and the savage behavior of the enemy. But war is politics by other means, so
politics is war by other means. Even in peacetime, the state is predicated on force. And
this use of force requires justification. The atrocity story is the tool used to convince
people that the use of state force is legitimate.

Coming from a different vantage point, Rene Girard would call this a “founding mur-
der.” Once you see this technique, you see it everywhere. Somewhat toned-down
versions of the atrocity story are the go-to technique used to justify expansions of
political power.

      If we don’t force people to take off their shoes at the airport, people will die!

      If we don’t stop people from voluntarily taking experimental curative drugs, peo-

42
2.3. POLITICAL POWER AND TECHNOLOGICAL TRUTH                                              41



         ple will die!

      If we don’t set up a disinformation office to stop people from making hostile
         comments online, people will die!

Indeed, almost everything in politics is backed by an atrocity story.21 There’s a some-
times real, sometimes fake, sometimes exaggerated Girardian founding murder (or at
least founding injury) behind much of what the government does.

Sometimes the atrocity story is framed in terms of terrorists, sometimes in terms of
children. . .but the general concept is “something so bad happened, we must use (state)
force to prevent it from happening again.” Often this completely ignores the death
caused by that force itself. For example, when the FDA “prevented” deaths by cracking
down on drug approvals after thalidomide, it caused many more deaths via Eroom’s
Law and drug lag.

And sometimes the atrocity story is just completely fake; before Iraq was falsely accused
of holding WMD, it was falsely accused of tossing babies from incubators.

With that said, it’s possible to overcorrect here. Just because there is an incentive to
fake (or exaggerate) atrocities does not mean that all atrocities are fake or exagger-
ated.22 Yes, you should be aware that states are always “flopping,” exaggerating the
severity of the fouls against them or the mascots they claim to represent, trying to
bring in the public on their side, whether they are Chinese or American or Russian.

But once you’re aware of the political power model of history, the next goal is to guard
against both the Scylla and the Charybdis, against being too credulous and too cynical.
Because just as the atrocity story is a tool for political power, unfortunately so too is
genocide denial — as we can see from The New York Times’ Pulitzer-winning coverup
of Stalin’s Ukrainian famine.

To maintain this balance, to know when states are lying or not, we need a form of truth
powerful enough to stand outside any state and judge it from above. A way to respond
to official statistics not with either reflexive faith or disbelief, but with dispassionate,
independent calculation.

The bottom-up cryptohistory we introduced in the previous section is clearly relevant.
But to fully appreciate it we need an allied theory: the technological truth theory of
history.


   21Remy Munasifi’s video on the topic is excellent: People Will Die!
   22Not all laws are counterproductive either, though many new laws are. That’s because new laws
are like code that is pushed live to production without even being read (let alone tested), often in
the face of tremendous opposition, affecting millions of citizens, with minimal monitoring to ensure
they’re producing the desired results, an extremely slow customer feedback cycle, and few ways to
truly opt out. Not all laws, though!

43
42                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



2.3.2 Technological Truth as the Driving Force of History

The political power model of history gives us a useful lens: history is often just Leninist
who/whom and Schmittian friend/enemy. But it’s a little parched23 to say that history
is always and only that, solely about the raw exercise of political power. After all, a
society must pass down true facts about nature, for example, or else its crops will not
grow24 — and its political class will lose power.

This leads to a different set of tech-focused lenses for analyzing history.

      Technological determinist model: technology is the driving force of history. While
         the political determinist model stresses that history is written — and hence dis-
         torted —by the winners, and thereby propagates only that which is useful to a
         given state, the technological determinist model notes that there are some key
         areas — principally in science and technology — where many (if not most) soci-
         eties derive a benefit from passing down a technical fact without distortion. There
         is after all an unbroken chain from Archimedes, Aryabhata, Al-Kwarizhmi, and
         antiquity to all our existing science and technology. Hundreds of years later, we
         don’t care that much about the laws of Isaac Newton’s time, but we do care about
         Newton’s laws. In this model, all political ideologies have been around for all time
         — the only thing that changes is whether a given ideology is now technologically
         feasible as an organizing system for humanity. Thus: political fashions just come
         and go in cycles, so the absolute measure of societal progress is a culture’s level
         of technological advancement on something like the Kardashev scale.

      Trajectory model: histories are trajectories. We mentioned this concept before
         when we discussed history as a cryptic epic of twisting trajectories, but it’s worth
         reprising. If you’re technically inclined, you might wonder why we spend so
         much time on history in this book. One answer is that histories are trajectories
         of dynamical systems. If you can spend your entire life studying wave equations,
         diffusion equations, time series, or the Navier-Stokes equations — and you can —
         you can do the same for the dynamics of people. In more detail, we know from
         physics (and Stephen Wolfram!) that very simple rules can produce incredibly
         complicated trajectories of dynamical systems. For Navier-Stokes, for example,
         we can divide these trajectories up into laminar flow, turbulent flow, inviscid

   23There’s an amusing meme which illustrates the limits of political history. “Time is real,” says
Aristotle. “Time is an illusion of the mind,” says Immanuel Kant. “Time was invented by clock
companies to sell more clocks,” says Karl Marx.
   24Of course, some regimes did interfere with the transmission of basic scientific facts. Trofim Lysenko
famously said that wheat could become rye if only the working class willed it. He caused preventable
famines and murdered Mendelian geneticists for their bourgeois belief in ineradicable biology. His
ideology did gain him political power, for a time. . . but to what end? Subjects ruled under a political
ideology that completely denied technological truth ended up dying, which meant political power over
no one. From a 50,000 foot perspective, this was a form of natural selection pressure against the
spread of Soviet communism specifically, and against a purely political determinist model of the world
more generally. A mind virus that kills its host rapidly isn’t a great mind virus. In other words, there
is a consequence for excessive untruth in service of political power, though that consequence might
simply be death of both ruler and ruled.

44
2.3. POLITICAL POWER AND TECHNOLOGICAL TRUTH                                              43



         flow, incompressible flow, and so on, to describe different ways a velocity field
         can evolve over time. These classifications are derived from measurements made
         of fluids over time. And the study of just one of these trajectory types can be a
         whole research discipline.

         That’s how rich the dynamics of inanimate objects are. Now compare that to
         the macroscopic movements of millions of intelligent agents. You can similarly
         try to derive rules about how humans behave under situations of laminar good
         times, turbulent revolutionary times, and so on by studying the records we have
         of human behavior — the data exhaust that humans produce.

         This analogy is actually very tight if you think about virtual economies and the
         history of human behavior on social networks and cryptosystems. In the fullness
         of time, with truly open datasets, we may even be able to develop Asimovian
         psychohistory from all the data recorded in the ledger of record, namely a way to
         predict the macroscopic behavior of humans in certain situations without know-
         ing every microscopic detail. We can already somewhat do this for constructed
         environments like games25 and markets, and ever more human environments are
         becoming literally digitally constructed.26

      Statistical model: history aids predictions. From a statistician’s perspective, his-
         tory is necessary for accurately computing the future. See any time series analysis
         or machine learning paper — or the Kalman filter, which makes this concept very
         explicit. To paraphrase Orwell, without a quantitatively accurate record of the
         past you cannot control the future, in the sense that your control theory literally
         won’t work.

      Helix model: linear and cyclical history can coexist. From a progressive’s perspec-
         tive, history is a linear trend, where the “arc of history” bends towards freedom,
         and where those against a given cause are on the wrong side of history27. Others
         think of history as cyclical, a constant loop where the only thing these technolo-
         gists are doing is reinventing the wheel, or where “strong men create good times,
         good times create weak men, weak men create hard times, and hard times cre-
         ate strong men.” But there’s a third view, a helical view of history, which says
         that from one viewpoint history is indeed progressive, from another it’s genuinely
         cyclical, and the reconciliation is that we move a bit forward technologically with
         each turn of the corkscrew rather than collapsing. In this view, attempts to re-
         store the immediate preceding state are unlikely, as they’re rewinding the clock
         — but you might be able to get to a good state by winding the helix all the way

   25In history, you can’t re-rerun the experiment. But for chess, you can. You can restore the initial
condition and replay the game.
   26This is the open metaverse and augmented reality. But it’s also social networks and financial apps.
A very large fraction of human interactions now have something digital in the middle, just as they
grew to have a piece of paper from the state in the middle over the course of the last few centuries
(eg birth and death certificates, property registries, and so on).
   27People deemed to be on the wrong side of history aren’t just losing, they’re fighting against a
changing moral climate which will condemn them for fighting in the first place.

45
44                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         past 12’o’clock to get the reboot. Or you might just collapse.

      Ozymandias model: civilization can collapse. History shows us that technological
         progress is not inevitable. The Fall of Civilizations podcast really makes this
         clear. Gobekli Tepe is one example. Whether you’re thinking of this as an
         astronomer (where are all the intelligent life forms out there? Is the universe a
         dark forest?) or an anthropologist (how did all these advanced civilizations just
         completely die out?), it’s sobering to think that our civilization may just be like
         the best player in a video game so far: we’ve made it the furthest, but we have
         no guarantee that we’re going to win before killing ourselves28 and wiping out
         like all the other civilizations before us.

      Lenski model: organisms are not ordinal. Richard Lenski ran a famous series of
         long-term evolution experiments with E. coli where he picked out a fresh culture
         of bacteria each day, froze it down in suspended animation, and thereby saved
         a snapshot of what each day of evolution looked like over the course of decades.
         The amazing thing about bacteria is that they can be unfrozen and reanimated,
         so Lenski could take an old E. coli strain from day 1173 and put it into a test
         tube with today’s strain to see who’d reproduce the most in a head-to-head
         competition. The result showed that history is not strictly ordinal ; just because
         the day 1174 strain had outcompeted the day 1173 strain, and the day 1175 strain
         had outcompeted the day 1174 strain, and so on — does not necessarily mean
         that today’s strain will always win a head to head with the strain from day 1173.
         The complexity of biology is such that it’s more like an unpredictable game of
         rock/paper/scissors.

      Train Crash model: those who don’t know history are doomed to repeat it. Another
         way to think about history is as a set of expensive experiments, where people
         often made certain choices that seemed reasonable at the time and ended up in
         calamitous straits. That’s communism, for example: a persuasive idea for many,
         but one that history shows to not actually produce great results in practice.

      Idea Maze model: those who overfit to history will never invent the future. This
         is the counterargument to the Train Crash model — past results may not predict
         future performance, and sometimes you need to have a beginner’s mindset to
         innovate. Generally this works better for opt-in technologies and investments
         than top-down modifications of society like communism. One tool for this comes
         from a concept I wrote up a while ago called the idea maze. The relevant bit here is
         that just because a business proposition didn’t work in the past doesn’t necessarily
         mean it won’t work today. The technological and social prerequisites may have
         dramatically changed, and doors previously closed may now have opened. Unlike
         the laws of physics, society is not time invariant. As even the world’s leading
         anti-tech blog once admitted:

   28Naval Ravikant has tweeted about the concept of the “ender,” the single individual with the power
to end humanity.

46
2.3. POLITICAL POWER AND TECHNOLOGICAL TRUTH                                  45


                Virtual reality was an abject failure right up to the moment it wasn’t.
                In this way, it has followed the course charted by a few other breakout
                technologies. They don’t evolve in an iterative way, gradually gaining
                usefulness. Instead, they seem hardly to advance at all, moving forward
                in fits and starts, through shame spirals and bankruptcies and hype
                and defensive crouches — until one day, in a sudden about-face, they
                utterly, totally win.

      Wright-Fisher model: history is what survives natural selection. In population
        genetics, there’s an important model of how mutations arise and spread called
        the Wright-Fisher model. When a new mutation arises, it’s in only 1 out of N
        people. How does it get to N out of N, to 100%, to what’s called “fixation”? Well,
        first, it might not ever do that. It might just die out. It might also get to N out of
        N simply by luck, if the population of N is small — this is known as “fixation by
        genetic drift,” where those with the mutation just happen to reproduce more than
        others. But if the mutation confers some selective advantage s, if it aids in the
        reproduction of its host in a competitive environment, then it has a better than
        luck chance of getting to 100%. Similarly, those historical ideas that we’ve heard
        about can be thought of as those that aided or at least did not interfere with
        the propagation of their respective carriers, often the authorities that write those
        histories. Some of these ideas have tagged along by dumb luck, while others are
        claims that were selectively advantageous to the success of the regime - often by
        delegitimizing their rivals and legitimizing their own rule, or by giving them new
        technologies. This is a theory of memetic evolution; the ideological mutations
        that add technological edge or political power are the ones selected for.

      Computational model: history is the on-chain population; all the rest is editorial-
        ization. There’s a great book by Franco Moretti called Graphs, Maps, and Trees.
        It’s a computational study of literature. Moretti’s argument is that every other
        study of literature is inherently biased. The selection of which books to discuss
        is itself an implicit editorialization. He instead makes this completely explicit by
        creating a dataset of full texts, and writing code to produce graphs. The argu-
        ment here is that only a computational history can represent the full population
        in a statistical sense; anything else is just a biased sample.

      Genomic model: history is what DNA (and languages, and artifacts) show us.
        David Reich’s Who We Are and How We Got Here is the canonical popular
        summary of this school of thought, along with Cavalli-Sforza’s older book on the
        History and Geography of Human Genes. The brief argument is: our true history
        is written in our genes. Mere texts can be faked, distorted, or lost, but genomics
        (modern or ancient) can’t be. Languages and artifacts are a bit less robust in
        terms of the signal for historical reconstruction, though they often map to what
        the new genomic studies are showing about patterns of ancient migrations.

      Tech Tree model: history is great men constrained by the adjacent possible. As
        context, the great man theory of history says that individuals like Isaac Newton

47
46                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


        and Winston Churchill shaped events. The counterargument says that these men
        were carried on tides larger than them, and that others would have done the
        same in their place. For example, for many (not all) Newtons, there is a Leibniz,
        who could also have invented calculus. It’s impossible to fully test either of these
        theories without a Lenski-like experiment where we re-run history with the same
        initial conditions, but a useful model to reconcile the two perspectives is the tech
        tree from Civilization. Briefly, all known science represents the frontier of the
        tree, and an individual can choose to extend that tree in a given direction. There
        wasn’t really a Leibniz for Satoshi, for example; at a time when others were
        focused on social, mobile, and local, he was working on a completely different
        paradigm. But he was constrained by the available subroutines, concepts like
        Hashcash and chained timestamps and elliptic curves. Just like da Vinci could
        have conceived a helicopter, but probably not built it with the materials then
        available, the tech tree model allows for individual agency but subjects it to
        the constraint of what is achievable by one person in a given era. The major
        advantage of a tech tree is that (like the idea maze) it can be made visible, and
        navigable, as has been done for longevity by the Foresight Institute.


You might find it a bit surprising that there are as many different models for under-
standing history — let’s call them historical heuristics — as there are programming
paradigms. Why might this be so? Well, just like the idea of statecraft strategies that
we introduce later, the study of history can also be analogized to a type of program-
ming, or at least data analysis. That is, history is the analysis of the log files.


      Data exhaust model: history as the analysis of the log files. Here, we mean
        “log files” in the most general sense of everything society has written down or
        left behind; the documents, yes, but also the physical artifacts and genes and
        artwork, just like a log “file” can contain binary objects and not just plain text.


        Extending the analogy, you can try to debug a program by flying blind without
        the logs, or alternatively you can try to look at every row of the logs, but rather
        than either of these extremes you’ll do best if you have a method for distilling
        the logs into something actionable.


And that’s why historical heuristics exist. They are strategies for distilling insight from
all the documents, genes, languages, transactions, inventions, collapses, and successes
of people over time. History is the entire record of everything humanity has done. It’s
a very rich data structure that we have only begun to even think of as a data structure.


We can now think of written history as an (incomplete, biased, noisy) distillation of
this full log. After all, if you’ve ever found a reporter’s summary of an eyewitness video
to be wanting, or found a single video misleading relative to multiple camera angles,
you’ll realize why having access to the full log of public events is a huge step forward.

48
2.3. POLITICAL POWER AND TECHNOLOGICAL TRUTH                                              47



2.3.3 A Collision of Political Power and Technological Truth

We’ve now defined a top-down and bottom-up model of history. The collision of these
two models, of the establishment’s Orwellian relativism29 and the absolute truth of the
Bitcoin blockchain, of political power and technological truth. . . that collision is worth
studying.

Let’s do three concrete examples where political power has encountered technological
truth.

      Tesla > NYT. Elon Musk used the instrumental record of a Tesla drive to knock
         down an NYT story. The New York Times Company claimed the car had run
         out of charge, but his dataset showed they had purposefully driven it around
         to make this happen, lying about their driving history. His numbers overturned
         their letters.

      Timestamp > Macron, NYT. Twitter posters used a photo’s timestamp to dis-
         prove a purported photo of the Brazilian fires that was tweeted by Emmanuel
         Macron and printed uncritically by NYT. The photo was shown via reverse image
         search to be taken by a photographer who had died in 2003, so it was more than
         a decade old. This was a big deal because The Atlantic was literally calling for
         war with Brazil over these (fake) photos.

      Provable patent priority. A Chinese court used an on-chain timestamp to establish
         priority in a patent suit. One company proved that it could not have infringed
         the patent of the other, because it had filed “on chain” before the other company
         had filed.

In the first and second examples, the employees of the New York Times Company
simply misrepresented the facts as they are wont to do, circulating assertions that were
politically useful against two of their perennial opponents: the tech founder and the
foreign conservative. Whether these misrepresentations were made intentionally or out
of “too good to check” carelessness, they were both attempts to exercise political power
that ran into the brick wall of technological truth. In the third example, the Chinese
political system delegated the job of finding out what was true to the blockchain.

In all three cases, technology provided a more robust means of determining what was
true than the previous gold standards — whether that be the “paper of record” or
the party-state. It decentralized the determination of truth away from the centralized
establishment.


   29By this, we mean that if all truth is relative and a function of power relations, the political party in
power can simply dictate what is true. It’s a fusion of Foucalt’s relativistic deconstruction and 1984’s
social construction of truth. If 2+2 is whatever those in power say it is, then guess what? Those in
power will say 2+2=5 if they want, and they’ll even get Fields Medalists to go to bat for them.

49
48                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



2.3.4 A Definition of Political and Technological Truths

It isn’t always possible to decentralize the determination of truth away from a political
establishment. Some truths are intrinsically relative (and hence political), whereas
others are amenable to absolute verification (and hence technological).

Here’s the key: is it true if others believe it to be true, or is it true regardless of what
people believe?

A political truth is true if everyone believes it to be true. Things like money, status,
and borders are in this category. You can change these by rewriting facts in people’s
brains. For example, the question of what a dollar is worth, who the president is, and
where the border of a country is are all dependent on the ideas installed in people’s
heads. If enough people change their minds, markets move, presidents change, and
borders shift.30

Conversely, a technical truth is true even if no human believes it to be true. Facts
in math, physics, and biochemistry are in this category. They exist independent of
what’s in people’s brains. For example, what’s the value of , the speed of light, or the
diameter of a virus? 31

Those are the two extremes: political truths that you can change by rewriting the
software in people’s brains, and technical truths that exist independent of that.


2.3.5 A Balance of Political Power and Technological Truth

Once you reluctantly recognize that not every aspect of a sociopolitical order can be
derived from an objective calculation, and that some things really do depend on an
arbitrary consensus, you realize that we need to maintain a balance between political
power and technological truth.32

Towards this end, the Chinese have a pithy saying: the backwards will be beaten.
If you’re bad at technology, you’ll be beaten politically. Conversely, the Americans
also have a saying: “you and what army?” It doesn’t matter how good you are as an
individual technologist if you’re badly outnumbered politically. And if you’re unpopular
enough, you won’t have the political power to build in the physical world.

   30This is what the US establishment is set up to manipulate globally, and the Chinese establishment
is good at domestically.
   31This is where the US establishment is particularly out of its depth, but where the Chinese estab-
lishment is fairly strong. Most US politicians don’t have technical backgrounds, prominent journalists
can’t do basic math, and few of the people involved in the US establishment have built anything more
complicated than a bookshelf. Meanwhile, the Chinese establishment is filled with engineers and has
built up their country over the last 40 years, even if the next generation of Chinese leaders may not
have such a background.
   32Blockchains do move more aspects of politics into technology, by turning societal agreement over
a border into societal agrement over a number. But the software in people’s heads still matters, as
blockchains only work if enough people hold their underlying asset (maintaining an nonzero price),
agree to run the same version of node and wallet software, and so on. Contrast this to, say, a helicopter
- which requires no societal consensus at all to work, as it depends solely on the laws of physics.

50
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                               49


Combining these views tells us to seek a balance between nationalism and rationalism,
where the former is thought of in the broadest sense as “group identity.” It’s a balance
between political power and technological truth, between ingroup-stabilizing narratives
and inconvenient facts. And you need both.

So that’s how the political and technological theories of history interrelate. Technolog-
ical history is the history of what works; political history is the history of what works
to retain power. Putting all the pieces together:

      We have a political theory of history that says “social and political incentives
        favor the propagation of politically useful narratives.”

      We have a technological theory of history that says “financial and technical in-
        centives favor the propagation of technological truths.”

      We have a set of examples that show how politically powerful actors were con-
        strained by decentralizing technology.

      We have more examples that show that some facts really are determined by
        societal consensus, while others are amenable to decentralized verification.

      And we understand why groups need both to survive; the backwards will be
        beaten, while the unpopular will never have political power in the first place.

Can we generalize these observations into a broader thesis, into an overarching theory
that includes the clash of political power and technological truth as a special case? We
can. And that leads us to a discussion of God, State, and Network.


2.4 God, State, Network

The collision between the top-down and bottom-up views of history, between history
as written by the winners and history as written to the ledger, between political power
and technological truth. . . that encounter is a collision of Leviathans.

To understand this, imagine two schoolboys fighting on a playground. It’s not long
before one of them says “my dad can beat up your dad!” There’s profundity in this
banality. Even at a very young age, a child believes he can appeal to a higher power,
a Leviathan, a powerful man who can sweep the field of his enemies, including Robert
from recess.

Men are not so different from children in this regard. Every doctrine has its Leviathan,
that prime mover who hovers above all. For a religion, it is God. For a political
movement, it is the State. And for a cryptocurrency, it is the Network. These three
Leviathans hover over fallible men to make them behave in pro-social ways.

Once we generalize beyond God, once we realize there’s not one but three Leviathans in
a Hobbesian sense, much becomes clear. Movements that aren’t God-worshipping reli-
gions are often State-worshipping political movements or Network-worshipping crypto

51
50                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



tribes. Many progressive atheists are by no means astatists; they worship the State as
if it were God. And many libertarian atheists may not believe in either God or the
State, but they do believe in the Network - whether that be their social network or
their cryptocurrency.

This deserves some elaboration.


2.4.1 What is the Most Powerful Force in the World?

The first Leviathan was God. In the 1800s, people didn’t steal because they actually
feared God. They believed in a way that’s hard for us to understand, they thought
of God as an active force in the world, firing-and-brimstoning away. They wanted
god-fearing men in power, because a man who genuinely believed in God would behave
well even if no one could punish him. That is, a powerful leader who actually believed
that eternal damnation was the punishment for violating religious edicts could be relied
upon by the public even if no human could see whether he had misbehaved. At least,
this is a rational retrofitting of why being genuinely “god-fearing” was important to
people, though they might not articulate it in quite that way. God was the ultimate
force, the Leviathan.

By the late 1800s, Nietzsche wrote that “God is dead.” What he meant is that a critical
mass of the intelligentsia didn’t believe in God anymore, not in the same way their
forefathers did. In the absence of God, a new Leviathan now rose to pre-eminence, one
that existed before but gained new significance: the State. And so in the 1900s, why
didn’t you steal? Because even if you didn’t believe in God, the State would punish you.
The full global displacement of God by the State (something already clearly underway
in France since 1789) led to the giant wars of the 20th century, Democratic Capitalism
vs Nazism vs Communism. These new faiths replaced g-o-d with g-o-v, faiths which
centered the State over God as the most powerful force on earth.

That brings us to the present. Now, today, as you can see from this graph and this
one, it is not just God that is dead. It is the State that is dying. Because here in the
early innings of the 21st century, faith in the State is plummeting. Faith in God has
crashed too, though there may be some inchoate revival of religious faith pending. But
it is the Network — the internet, the social network, and now the crypto network —
that is the next Leviathan.

So: in the 1800s you wouldn’t steal because God would smite you, in the 1900s you
didn’t steal because the State would punish you, but in the 2000s you can’t steal
because the Network won’t let you.33 Either the social network will mob you, or

   33The Network is not a wholly new force in human affairs, but it is newly powerful. As one example
of Networks before the internet, Communism can be thought of as a State/Network synthesis, with
the Soviet state as primary and its international “Comintern” network of communist revolutionaries
as secondary (especially after Trotsky’s murder). As another example, see this section on “Culture”
as a third force alongside Church and State in Jacob Burckhardt’s Force and Freedom. He’d come to
similar conclusions almost 200 years ago, which I only discovered years after my 2015 talk on God,
State, and Network.

52
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                                          51



the cryptocurrency network won’t let you steal because you lack the private key, or
(eventually) the networked AI will detect you, or all of the above.

Put another way, what’s the most powerful force on earth? In the 1800s, God. In
the 1900s, the US military. And by the mid-2000s, encryption. Because as Assange
put it, no amount of violence can solve certain kinds of math problems. So it doesn’t
matter how many nuclear weapons you have; if property or information is secured by
cryptography, the state can’t seize it without getting the solution to an equation.



2.4.2 Rubber Hoses Don’t Scale

Now, the obvious response is that a state like Venezuela can still try to beat someone
up to get that solution, do the proverbial rubber hose attack to get their password and
private keys — but first they’ll have to find that person’s oine identity, map it to a
physical location, establish that they have jurisdiction, send in the (expensive) special
forces, and do this to an endless number of people in an endless number of locations,
while dealing with various complications like anonymous remailers, multisigs, zero-
knowledge, dead-man’s switches, and timelocks. So at a minimum, encryption increases
the cost of state coercion.

In other words, seizing Bitcoin is not quite as easy as inflating a fiat currency. It’s
not something a hostile state like Venezuela can seize en masse with a keypress, they
need to go house-by-house. The only real way around this scalability problem would
be a cheap autonomous army of AI police drones, something China may ultimately be
capable of, but that’d be expensive and we aren’t there yet.34

Until then, the history of Satoshi Nakamoto’s successful maintenance of pseudonymity,
of Apple’s partial thwarting of the FBI, and of the Bitcoin network’s resilience to the
Chinese state’s mining shutdown show that the Network’s pseudonymity and cryptog-
raphy are already partially obstructing at least some of the State’s surveillance and
violence.

Encryption thus limits governments in a way no legislation can. And as described at
length in this piece, it’s not just about protection of private property. It’s about using
encryption and crypto to protect freedom of speech, freedom of association, freedom of
contract, prevention from discrimination and cancellation via pseudonymity, individual
privacy, and truly equal protection under rule-of-code — even as the State’s paper-based
guarantees of the same become ever more hollow. Because the computer always gives
the same output given the same input code, unlike the fallible human judiciary with
its error-prone (or politicized) enforcement of the law.

   34This works in another way: autonomous drones are a way for a state to wage war without paying
as many people, as it just needs to charge up its drones. Propaganda delivered over social media is
a different alternative to expensive boots on the ground. These techniques are, respectively, the CCP
and NYT coalitions’ ways around the economic constraints on military action imposed by BTC. See
the book Gold, Blood, and Power and our later chapter on The Tripolar Moment.

53
52                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


In this sense, the Network is the next Leviathan, because on key dimensions it is
becoming more powerful and more just than the State.


2.4.3 The Network is the Next Leviathan

When we say that the Network is the next Leviathan, which we can abbreviate as
“Network > State” it is useful to give specifics. Here are several concrete examples
where the Network’s version of a given social practice is more powerful than the State’s
version.

    1. Encryption > State Violence. When there is strong encryption government can’t
        crack, that means communications states can’t eavesdrop on, transactions they
        can’t intercept, and digital borders they can’t penetrate. It means nothing less
        than the ability to organize groups outside state control, and thus a diminution
        in the power of states to control.

    2. Cryptoeconomy > Fiat Economy. We just discussed this in the context of the
        Network’s Bitcoin being money the State can’t easily freeze, seize, ban, or print.
        In theory this is just a special case of the point on encryption, but its implications
        are broad: all manner of financial instruments, corporate vehicles, accounting,
        payroll, and the like can be done on-chain outside the control of states.

    3. Peer-to-Peer > State Media. There are two kinds of state media: state-controlled
        media as in China’s Xinhuanet, or state-control media as in America’s The New
        York Times. The latter controls the state, the former is controlled by the state,
        but both fight freedom of speech. Network-facilitated P2P communication is
        anathema to them, particularly if end-to-end encrypted. Citations in particular
        are worth calling out here — archival references like Google Books, or NCBI, or
        archive.is can be linked to prove a point, even if official State channels aren’t
        presently favoring that point of view.

    4. Social > National. Social networks change many things, but a critical one is that
        they change the nature of community. Your community is your social network,
        not necessarily the people who live near you. When the network identity is more
        salient than the neighor relationship, it challenges the very premise of the West-
        phalian state, which is that (a) people who live geographically near each other
        share values and (b) therefore laws should be based on geographic boundaries.
        The alternative is that only people who are geodesically near each other in the
        social network share values, and therefore the laws that govern them should be
        based on network boundaries.

    5. Mobile > Sessile. Mobile is making us more mobile. And law is a function of
        latitude and longitude; as you change your location, you change the local, state,
        and federal laws that apply to you. As such, migration is as powerful a way to
        change the law under which you live as election. COVID-19 lockdowns may be
        just the beginning of State attempts to control Network-facilitated physical exit.

54
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                               53


        But in normal circumstances, smartphones are helping people move ever more
        freely, while the borders of physical states are frozen in place.

    6. Virtual Reality > Physical Proximity. As a complement to mobile, the Network
        offers another way to opt out of State-controlled physical surroundings: namely,
        to put on a VR (or AR) headset, at which point you are in a completely different
        world with different people surrounding you and different laws.

    7. Remote > In-person. The Network allows you to work and communicate from
        anywhere. Combined with mobile, this further increases leverage against the
        State. The concept of the network state as a division of the world by people
        rather than by land is particularly important here, as network states are natively
        built for getting voluntary subscription revenue from people around the world.
        The diaspora is the state.

    8. International > National. The Network gives people more of a choice over what
        specific State they are subject to. For example, they can move a server hosting
        their website from country to country with a few clicks.

    9. Smart Contracts > Law. The State’s paper-based legal system is costly and
        unpredictable. A similar set of facts in two different cities in the same country
        could result in a different ruling. Lawyers are expensive, paper contracts have
        typos and illogic, and cross-border agreements range from complex to impossible.
        We’re still in the early days of smart contracts, but as we get well-debugged
        and formally-verified contract libraries, this is an area where the Network is
        poised to take over from the State. Imagine truly international law: it’s done
        programmatically rather than via pieces of paper, across borders outside the
        domain of legacy states, and by global technologists rather than country-specific
        lawyers.

  10. Cryptographic Verification > Official Confirmation. Perhaps the most important
        arena in which the Network is stronger than the state is in the nature of truth
        itself. As incredible as it may sound, the blockchain is the most important de-
        velopment in history since the advent of writing itself, as it’s a cryptographically
        verifiable, highly replicated, unfalsifiable, and provably complete digital record
        of a system. It’s the ultimate triumph of the technological truth view of history,
        as there are now technical and financial incentives for passing down true facts,
        regardless of the sociopolitical advantages any given government might have for
        suppressing them. To foreshadow a bit, this ledger of record is history written by
        the Network rather than the State.

These examples can be multiplied. As mentioned before, Uber and Lyft are better
regulators than the State’s paper-based taxi medallions, email is superior to the USPS,
and SpaceX is out-executing NASA. If you think about borders, you now need to think
about the Network’s telepresence (which defeats physical borders) and its encryption
(which erects digital borders). Or if you care about, say, the US census, the Network
gives a real-time survey which is far more up to date than the State’s 10 year process.

55
54                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



In short, if you can bring the Network to bear on an issue, it will often be the most
powerful force. This is essentially what every startup founder does, all the time: they
try to figure out the Network way of doing something, without going through the State.
There’s an app for that!

This is conceptually important, because a startup society founder that can reposition
a particular conflict such that it is the Network against the State has a chance to win.
But if they go through the legacy State, they’ll be an alligator out of water, and they
will likely lose.


Network > State: Trump’s Deplatforming

Applying the “Network > State” formulation to recent events, think about January
2021, when — at the behest of the New York Times Company and all of mainstream
media — Google, Apple, Amazon, Facebook, and Twitter combined to deplatform a
sitting president and disappear his supporters’ app from the internet.

This was undeniable proof of the US government’s impotence, because the “most pow-
erful man in the world” was clearly no longer even the most powerful man in his own
country. The informal Network (the US establishment) trumped the formal State (the
US government).35

Obviously, Trump and the Republicans weren’t in control of events. Less obviously,
elected Democrats weren’t either. Oh, sure, many of them added their voices to the
cacophony. But because the First Amendment constrains government capacity to re-
strain speech, they couldn’t tell the tech CEOs to shut down opposition voices - but
the publishers could. And because the final control over these networks is in private
hands, state officials didn’t have the final say.

Put another way, the people with their fingers on the button are no longer elected
officials of the state. Does the US government feel like it is in charge? That is what
Network > State means.


2.4.4 The State is Still A Leviathan

To be clear, the Network does not win every conflict with the State. In many cases the
actual outcome is “State > Network.” Indeed, the conflict between these two Leviathans

   35There’s a strong argument that the power of the presidency has been steadily declining since FDR,
who can be thought of as a four-term dictator who consolidated power, prosecuted his enemies, and
ruled till he died. All the “imperial presidency” stuff like John Yoo’s memos and Obama’s executive
orders can be reconceptualized as attempts to still get something done from the White House despite
the reality that the presidency’s power was ever more dilute.
   Indeed, the US today has something similar to a “constitutional monarchy,” namely a “bureaucratic
presidency” wherein the president is in key respects an increasingly vestigial figure. Some who recognize
this think it can be turned around with a “true election.” Others think you’ll need to start over, with
startup societies and network states.

56
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                                          55



will shape this century like the conflict between the God and State Leviathans shaped
the last.

Some examples of “State > Network” include Ross Ulbricht’s arrest by the US govern-
ment, the persecution of Julian Assange and Edward Snowden, China’s crackdown on
cryptocurrency, the European Union’s GDPR regulation, the COVID lockdowns that
inhibited any digital nomad’s ability to exit, the rising number of government internet
shutdowns, and the US establishment’s push to censor the internet.

Let’s review a few cases of particular importance: the techxit from San Francisco, the
political defeat of tech founders in China, the biasing of AI in the name of AI bias, and
the digital deplatforming of establishment critics in both the West and East.

    1. SF city government > Bay Area tech founders. Despite how competent the tech
         founders of SF were on the Network, the political billionaires of the San Francisco
         city government managed to use their control of the State to turn the city into a
         hellhole. Intentionally or not, this had the effect of driving out the new money,
         their potential competition.

         Yes, there have been some successful tech-funded recall efforts recently, but it’s
         likely too little, too late. It’s akin to a stock price showing a bit of an upward
         trend after a huge and irreversible drop. Because the Bay Area’s monopoly is
         over. Technology has now globally decentralized into web3, and San Francisco
         (and even Silicon Valley) has now lost its position as the undisputed tech capital
         of the world. You no longer need to go to the Bay Area to build a startup —you
         can found and fund from anywhere.

         This is, on balance, a good thing — the fact that tech is no longer highly depen-
         dent on the triple dysfunction of SF/CA/USA is crucial to the world’s future.
         Note also that while the defeat of tech in SF was due to State > Network, the
         reason tech lives to fight another day is thanks to remote work, which allowed
         movement away from SF in a “Techxit.” And remote work is a case of Network
         > State.

    2. CCP > Chinese tech founders. Until about 2018, Chinese tech founders were cel-
         ebrated by the CCP. Imagine if Zuckerberg and Dorsey were given the equivalent
         of Senate seats for their contribution to the economy, brought into the estab-
         lishment rather than standing at a remove, and you’ll get a sense of what the
         tone was like. Jack Ma (Alibaba founder), Pony Ma (Tencent founder), and their
         peers were either one of the 95 million CCP members (<7% of the country) or
         praised by CCP media.

         Then everything shifted. Just like America, China had its own establishment-
         driven techlash.36 The huge cost of pausing of the massive ANT Financial IPO

   36Indeed, many events in America are now followed by a similar event in China, or vice versa.
Some examples include (a) internet censorship, (b) nationalism + socialism, (c) social credit scores
/ cancel culture, (d) “human flesh search” and Twitter mobs, (e) COVID lockdowns, (f) increasing
militarization, and (g) state takeover of tech companies.

57
56                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         on some regulatory pretense was a signal. For the last several years, the CCP has
         put what it considers to be the “national interest” over enormous sums of money,
         incurring at least a trillion dollars in cost for COVID lockdowns, shutdowns of
         IPOs, and overnight bans of entire industries like gaming and Bitcoin mining.

         This looks stupid. Maybe it is stupid. Or maybe they know something we don’t.
         The CCP’s early action in the 2000s and 2010s to ban foreign social networks looks
         farsighted in retrospect, as if they hadn’t built their own Weibo and WeChat, then
         US executives in Silicon Valley would have been able to deplatform (or surveil)
         anyone from China with a keystroke. So, unfortunately, perhaps signaling that
         there are “more important things than money” and gearing for conflict will turn
         out to put the CCP in a better position for what comes.

         Be that as it may, the Chinese techlash is an example of “State > Network.” The
         CCP-controlled Chinese State beat the international Network of Chinese tech
         founders. But it didn’t win forever, as many of the most ambitious founders
         and funders in China are now using the Network to move abroad and escape the
         Chinese State.

    3. Biasing AI with AI Bias. Jon Stokes has written at length about “AI ethics”
         and I’d encourage you to read his work. But in brief, this entire pseudofield is
         about putting a thumb on the scale of AI algorithms in the name of balancing
         the scales, particularly at influential tech giants like Google. It’s about ensuring
         that members of the US establishment are always looking over the shoulder of
         technologists, making sure that their code is 100% regime compliant37, just as
         the Soviet Union did with its commissars, the NSDAP did with gleichschaltung,
         and Xi has done with Xuexi Qiangguo.38

         The fundamental concept is about asserting moral control over a technological
         field. AI “ethics” doesn’t really contest what is true or false, it contests what is
         good and bad. And what is bad? Anything that advances a politically unfavor-
         able narrative. As a concrete example, in 2021, Ukraine was widely reported to
         be a corrupt country full of Azov Battalion Nazis. By mid 2022, those reports
         would have been reclassified as “disinformation” and pushed down to page 10 of
         the search results39, if the AI bias people had their way.

         Now, the usual dodge is that there’s always discretion involved in the selection
         of any machine learning training set, and judgment used in the configuration of

   37A recurring theme in this book is that such a system of speech and thought controls arises when
an existing regime desires to preserve its power and there isn’t sufficient ability of citizens to exit. If
they could do it, Microsoft would ban the competition — and ban all their ads as disinformation. So
too for NYT and CCP.
   38Note the CCP is injecting “red genes” into companies directly: the Party’s influence is pervasive.
   39This is also why people are increasingly using Twitter as a search engine. Censorship is more
detectable when it’s individual accounts being silenced. This is part of the transition to web3: the
digitally signed web, where every single data structure has a digital signature, is a huge shift from
web2.

58
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                                          57



         any algorithm, so who is to say what “unbiased” means? But the goal here is
         to make sure that discretion does not scatter randomly, or at the discretion of
         the individual investigator, but instead consistently points in a single “ethically
         approved” direction, whether that be submission to NYT (in Blue America) or
         CCP (in China). It’s centralized political control by another name.

         Note also that the name of their field has been chosen to ward off attack. What,
         are you against ethics in AI? (These are the same people who speak mockingly
         of “ethics in journalism” when it suits them.)

         So, a better term for it is “AI bias,” not as in the study of bias, but as in the
         study of how to bias AI. And the power the AI bias people have is enormous.
         A few zealots in the right places at big tech companies can and will distort
         the Google results of billions of people, until and unless Google’s monopoly is
         disrupted, or unless the right people within Google push to make their algorithms
         transparent.40 Newspeak isn’t a dystopia for them, it’s an instruction manual.

         And they might well win. The episode where Merriam-Webster changed the
         dictionary in real-time for political purposes is only the beginning; the new Google
         is about to use its power to centrally change thought.

         This is considerably worse than Baidu, which more straightforwardly filters
         searches that are “problematic” for the CCP. Because the AI bias people pre-
         tend that they are doing it for the powerless, when they are really doing it to
         maintain the US establishment’s power.

    4. Digital Deplatforming. Another example of the State trumping the Network, of
         political power exercised against technological truth, can be seen in the muzzling
         of regime-disfavored voices on social media.

         As always, this is obvious in China. Say something the CCP doesn’t like on
         Sina Weibo and your post disappears, and possibly your account and maybe
         you’re brought in for “tea” by the security forces. But in the West, if you say
         something the regime doesn’t like on Twitter, your post disappears, and possibly
         your account, and — in American protectorates like the UK — maybe you’re
         brought in for “tea” by the security forces.

         Ah, didn’t expect that, did you? But click those links. The only reason that
         UK-style hate speech laws haven’t yet come to the US is the First Amendment,
         which has also limited to some degree the totality of private attempts at speech
         and thought control.

         Nevertheless, even by 2019 we could see the convergence of the American and
         Chinese systems in this respect. Just as WeChat blocked mention of Tiananmen,
         Facebook blocked mention of an alleged whistleblower. Operationally, it’s the

   40It’s hard to ask them to unbias the results. What does that mean, 1998-2011-era Google? That’s
hard to specify and hard to diligence. It’s easier to push for open, transparent, search algorithms.
This may come true in web3; see this talk.

59
58                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


        same thing. In the East it’s official government censorship, whereas in the West
        it’s unofficial private censorship, but that’s not a substantive difference - it’s
        censorship as ordered by the Chinese and US establishments respectively. The
        substantive difference is that in the West there’s a third faction of decentralized
        censorship resistance.

The point is that sometimes Network > State (which is new), and sometimes State
> Network (which is what most people expect), and the competition between these
Leviathans will define our time.

But is it always competition, or could it also be co-optation?



2.4.5 Thesis, Antithesis, Synthesis

As Larry Ellison put it, “choose your competitors carefully, because you’ll become a lot
like them.” This is a tech founder’s version of the Hegelian dialectic, where thesis and
antithesis mix to form a synthesis.

In other words, when you have three Leviathans (God, State, Network) that keep
struggling with each other, they won’t remain pure forms. You’ll see people remix
them together to create new kinds of social orders, new hybrids, new syntheses in
the Hegelian sense. We already mentioned the Chinese version of this fusion (“the
backwards will be beaten”) in the context of political power vs technological truth, but
it goes beyond just the determination of truth to how society itself is organized. For
example:

      God/State: the mid-century US was “for god and country.” It stood against the
        USSR, where people worshipped the State as God. (Though the US also had a
        peer-to-peer Network component in the form of permitting capitalism within its
        borders, and the USSR did too in the form of the “Communist International,”
        the global network of spies fomenting communist revolution.)

      God/Network: this might be something like the Mormons, or the Jewish diaspora
        before Israel, or any religious diaspora connected by some kind of communications
        network. It’s a community of shared values connected by a communications
        network without a formal state.

      God/State/Network: this is something like the Jewish diaspora after Israel. Our
        One Commandment model also draws on this, as a startup society can be based on
        a traditional religion or on a moral imperative that’s on par with many religious
        practices, like veganism.

These are political examples of mixing Leviathans, but there are other ways of thinking
about the concept.

60
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                               59



2.4.6 Synthesis: The Network/God

One important synthesis that deserves special mention is the “Network/God”: a Net-
work God, an AI God, a GPT-9 or DALL·E 10 that gives instant, superhuman answers
to difficult questions using the knowledge of all of humanity.

After all, people already do confide to Google as if it were God, or at least a confessions
booth. In the 1980s there was a popular children’s book called Are You There God?
It’s Me, Margaret, and you can imagine an app version of this where people ask a given
AI God for advice.

That god need not be a general AI. It could encode a specific morality. It could be
tuned and trained on particular corpora rather than the general web. What would
Jesus do (WWJD), in an app? The Chinese Xuexi Qiangguo app could in fact be seen
as an early version of this — “What would Xi Jinping do?” — though one could also
have decentralized versions.

What would Lee Kuan Yew do? What would David Ben-Gurion do? What would
George Washington do? What would the people you respect advise in your situation?
A language model trained on their corpora — on all the public text and audio they’ve
emitted over their lives, which could amount to many millions of words — may achieve
something like the sci-fi episode where people are revived by AI in an app. There’s
already a v1, it just needs to be augmented with a VR simulacrum. And even though
this kind of thing is painted as negative in media like Her and Black Mirror, it’s really
not obvious that getting interactive advice from Lee Kuan Yew’s app is worse than
getting it from Lee Kuan Yew’s books.


2.4.7 Synthesis: The Network/State

The study of God/State/Network syntheses brings us to the fusion we’re most inter-
ested in: a Network/State, of which one of them is our titular network state. And
there are a few different ways to get to a Network/State fusion.

The first is the from-scratch version described in chapter one, where an internet leader
builds a large enough network union online that it can crowdfund territory and eventu-
ally attain diplomatic recognition. But it’s worth discussing other scenarios, where ex-
isting governments fuse with the network —both positive and negative Network/State
syntheses.


Positive Syntheses: BTC, Web3, Efficiency

Start with the observation that companies, cities, currencies, communities, and coun-
tries are all becoming networks.

As an analogy, we used to think of books, music, and movies as distinct. Then they
all became represented by packets sent over the internet. Yes, we listened to music

61
60                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


in audio players and viewed books in ebook readers, but their fundamental structure
became digital.

Similarly, today we think of stocks, bonds, gold, loans, and art as different. But all
of them are represented as debits and credits on blockchains. Again, the fundamental
structure became digital.

Now, we are starting to think of different kinds of collections of people –— whether
communities, cities, companies, or countries —– all fundamentally as networks, where
the digital profiles and how they interact become more and more fundamental.

This is obvious for communities and companies, which can already be fully remote and
digital, but even already existing cities and countries are starting to be modeled this
way, because (a) their citizens41 are often geographically remote, (b) the concept of
citizenship itself is becoming similar to digital single sign-on, (c) many 20th century
functions of government have already been de-facto transferred to private networks like
(electronic) mail delivery, hotel, and taxi regulation, (d) cities and countries increas-
ingly recruit citizens online, (e) so-called smart cities are increasingly administrated
through a computer interface, and (f) as countries issue central bank digital currencies
and cities likely follow suit, every polity will be publicly traded on the internet just like
companies and coins.

And that’s just for pre-existing polities which retrofit themselves with aspects of the
network. It doesn’t include the most fundamental network property of the de novo
network states described herein: namely that the citizenry itself first assembles in the
cloud and only then crowdfunds the earth.

Examples of pre-existing states integrating with the network include (a) El Salvador’s
integration with the Bitcoin network, (b) Wyoming’s decentralized autonomous or-
ganization (DAO) law and Norway’s cap table bill, which are integrations with the
Ethereum network, and (c) places like Estonia and Singapore, where every government
workflow is already online. In each of these cases, cities and states are fusing with
networks to ship new services that are useful to citizens.

This is the benign version of the Network/State fusion, the one people will flock to.


Negative Syntheses: USG, CCP, Monopoly

The malign version of the Network/State fusion is what happened in China, and is
happening in America at the federal level with the tech crackdowns. In both the
Chinese and American cases the State is “acquiring” centralized technology companies
at gunpoint, fusing with the Network from above.

In China the recipe was (a) a few years of media demonization plus (b) mandatory Xi
Jinping Thought sessions followed by (c) decapitation and quasi-nationalization –— as
is happening with Alibaba and ByteDance. In America during the techlash it was very

  41Substitute the word “resident” if you will for a city, as a city doesn’t have citizens in the passport-
carrying sense.

62
2.4. GOD, STATE, NETWORK                                                                                          61



similar: (a) several years of media demonization plus (b) quasi-mandatory wokeness
within followed by (c) anti-trust, regulation, and quasi-nationalization.

Sometimes the decapitation is forceful (Uber was an early target here) and sometimes
it’s quasi-voluntary. Indeed, one thesis on why many of the major tech founders have
stepped down as of mid-2022, other than Zuck, is that they don’t want to become
personally demonized during the no-win antitrust process. It’s more explicit in China
that this wasn’t a choice — Jack Ma is no longer in control of the company he founded,
and many other Chinese founders have been similarly relieved of their duties.

In other words, both the Chinese and American establishments have invented rationales
to essentially seize previously founder-controlled companies.42

That is, whatever the surface justification, these are hostile takeovers of centralized
tech companies by centralized states. Once taken over, these companies will be turned
into total surveillance machines and tools of social control. In China, this is already
obvious. But in America, anti-trust may mean zero trust.

To be clear, this is partially a forecast for the future, and perhaps it can be averted, but
in the aftermath of any ostensibly “economic” settlement the US national security state
could get everything it ever wanted in terms of backdoors to Google and Facebook.
The NSA won’t need to hack its way in, it’ll get a front door. And then it will likely
get hacked in turn, spraying all of your data over the internet.

This is the malign version of the Network/State fusion, the one people want to exit
from.


2.4.8 Synthesis: God, State, and Network

Can we put all three Leviathans together in the modern era? Is there something that’d
fit?

Yes. The benign version of the network/state synthesis we’ve just described offers
greater administrative efficiency, greater economic returns, and greater levels of citizen
consent. But it doesn’t yet offer greater purpose, or meaning.

As a preview, that’s where the One Commandment comes in. The concept is that
you don’t want or need to start an entirely new religion to build a startup society,
but you do need a moral innovation of some kind. If all you have to offer is a higher
standard of living, people may come as consumers, but they won’t come for the right
reasons. The consumer-citizen is coming to enjoy a great society, not to sacrifice to
make a society great. They won’t understand the values that underpin your startup
society’s valuation. And you likely won’t be able to build that high valuation or higher
standard of living without a higher purpose, just as neither Apple nor America itself

   42What’s the alternative? Decentralize or be nationalized. The BTC/web3 pole that we introduce
later gives a way for founders to ship protocols that are more robust to seizure by the American or
Chinese establishments, as they don’t simply involve demonizing a company but instead a protocol
with the scale of a country.

63
62                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



was initially built for money alone. You want to recruit producers, not consumers, and
for that, you’ll need a purpose.

That higher purpose could be a traditional religion, as in Rod Dreher’s Benedict Option,
but it could also be a doctrine with a deeply thought through “One Commandment,” a
moral innovation that inverts one of society’s core assumptions while keeping all others
intact.

For example, taking the seemingly trivial moral premise that “sugar is bad” and se-
riously carrying it through to build a Keto Kosher society involves a focused yet all-
encompassing change to every restaurant, grocery store, and meal within a jurisdiction.
We give more examples later.


2.4.9 New Leviathan, New States

The concept of three Leviathans explains why a network state is now feasible. The
Network is a new sheriff in town, a new Leviathan, a new force that is more powerful
than the State in many contexts. That has changed the balance of power. While
syntheses are arising, so are conflicts between Network and State. And that explains
much of today’s instability: when Leviathans wrestle, when Godzilla fights King Kong,
the earth trembles.


2.5 People of God, People of the State, People of the

             Network

We’ve talked about the history of power, of God, State, and Network. Now let’s talk
about the recent history of power struggles, between people of God, people of the State,
and people of the Network.

Stereotypically, the people of God offer43 thoughts and prayers, the people of the State
say “there oughta be a law!”, and the people of the Network write some code.

The differences go very deep. It’s a difference in first steps and in ultimate loyal-
ties. Once you understand whether someone prioritizes the God, State, or Network
Leviathan you understand what tactics they’ll prefer, what values they hold, and where
they’re coming from.

To illustrate this, let’s apply the lens of Leviathans to analyze (a) the internal divisions
within America’s conservative reds and progressive blues, (b) the conflict between global
technology and the US establishment, and (c) the mental model of the base-raters loyal
to the US establishment.

   43I’m somewhat sympathetic to some of the people of God, as thoughts and prayers are harder to
screw up than rules and regulations. Moreover, when tragedies occur, the American people of God
tend to be more genuinely charitable than the people of the State. The latter tend to feel that they
“gave at the office”.

64
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK63



As we’ll see, the introduction of the Network Leviathan clarifies some conflicts and
splits some factions.


2.5.1 American Tribes and Their Leviathans

The whole world tunes in daily to watch the endless American digital civil war on
Twitter. (“I feel bad for our country. But this is tremendous content.”) Countless
words have been written about this topic. But the lens of the Leviathans offers a new
perspective on these warring tribes, on the conservative reds, progressive blues, and
libertarianish grays named by Scott Alexander.

The gray tribe is the easiest to analyze. It is fair to say that they are primarily
people of the Network Leviathan. These technological progressives are not just atheists,
they are also astatists, as they do not typically believe in either God or the State.
They are genuinely internationalists in a way neither red nationalists nor blue faux44
internationalists are, as they don’t subscribe to American exceptionalism, and interact
with people from other countries through the Network as equals.

The blues and the reds are more complex, however. It’s not as simple as “Blue equals
State” and “Red equals non-State.” Not at all. A significant fraction of blues has now
gone to the Network; these are the left-libertarians, the web3 socialists. And a good
chunk of reds will remain loyal to the State; let’s call them secular nationalists.

So if and when things line up as Network vs State, if there’s a highly inflationary event
that pits the orange Bitcoin against the green Dollar, we may see an acceleration of
the ongoing realignment. Many blues will line up with grays and reds on the side of
the international Network, and many reds will side with blues to defend the centralized
American State.

Let’s explain.


Blue Tribe: Left-Authoritarians, Left-Libertarians

Each member of blue tribe will have to make a choice in the years to come: are they
loyal to neutral decentralized networks that treat both Americans and non-Americans
equally, or are they actually just loyal to the US establishment — essentially nationalists
in disguise? Is their definition of “democracy” commensurate with a world where the
4% (namely the Americans) rule the 96% (namely the non-Americans), inflating away
the globe’s savings, destroying local cultures, and surveilling the world at all times? Or
do they believe the rest of the world deserves digital self-determination? In short, will

   44Why call blues “faux” internationalists? Because their relationship with other countries is not
really one of equals. The NGO type wants pets, not peers. The State Department type wants
members of the coalition-of-the-willing to get in line, not to go off script. The blues are slightly
more diplomatic than the cartoonishly nationalist reds, but only slightly, and particularly in recent
years they’ve shifted away from Obama-era multilateralism to their own variety of unilateralism. See
Alvarez’s work here, here, and here, published in late 2020 and which has held up quite well.

65
64                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



the internationally-minded liberal choose the decentralized Network or the centralized
State?

To understand this choice, let’s orient ourselves. The blue tribe is the most powerful
in Western society today, and has two45 main internal factions: the left-authoritarians
who worship the State, and the left-libertarians who are (unconsciously) people of the
Network.46


Wokeness is a Doctrine, not a Religion

Before we begin, we need to understand that the blue belief system of “Wokeness” isn’t
exactly a religion. It’s a doctrine, and it includes both people of the State and the
Network.

That is, while it’s become popular to talk about Wokeness as a religion, and while
there is something to this, it’s more precise to talk about it as a doctrine: namely, “a
belief or set of beliefs held and taught by a church, political party, or other group.”
The concept of a doctrine encompasses religious and political beliefs, both God- and
State-worship. And nowadays the “other group” could be a Network entity of some
kind, like a social network or cryptocurrency.

So now we have an umbrella term: doctrine. God-worshippers have religions (reli-
gious doctrines), State-loyalists have political parties (with political doctrines), and
Network-centrists have social networks or cryptocurrencies (with tightly enforced con-
tent moderation or crypto tribalism respectively, which are network doctrines). Each
doctrine has a Leviathan, a most powerful force. And a religion is then just a type of
doctrine.

With this definition, we can return to the question: is capital-W Wokeness, like Com-
munism and Nazism before it, a religion that evolved to jump over the formal principle
of church/state separation by posing as a non-religion? Well, as several have now ob-
served, Wokeness does have cognates to many aspects of Christianity — we all have
the Calvinist original sin of bigotry, we’re going to the warm hell of climate change
unless we repent, unbelievers must “recant,” heresy must be suppressed, the West’s
beliefs must be evangelized at gunpoint, and so on. See Curtis Yarvin’s How Dawkins
Got Pwned, John McWhorter’s Woke Racism, Andrew Sullivan on America’s New Re-
ligions, Noah Smith on Wokeness as Old-Time Religion, Tom Holland’s concluding
chapter in Dominion, Paul Graham on Heresy, and Michael Shellenberger and Peter
Boghossian’s detailed infographic for perspectives on this topic.

But while it’s directionally accurate, calling wokeness a religion doesn’t quite fit because
the wokes have a different theory of the prime mover. Wokeness is better termed a
doctrine, because it’s actually crucial to note that wokes do not worship God; instead,
one faction of wokes worships the State and the other is, less consciously, people of

   45There are still conventionally religious blues, people of God, but they are not among the elite.
   46Reddit’s r/politicalcompassmemes abbreviates these as authleft and libleft respectively.

66
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK65


the Network. These internal denominational splits are defined by choice of Leviathan.
And they’ll be important in the escalating conflict between State and Network, between
Dollar and Bitcoin, between establishment journalists and decentralized media, between
the American government and the global internet, as these divisions promise to split
blue team in two.


Blue State: Left-Authoritarians

For the left-authoritarians among the blues, their primary Leviathan is the State, which
is very real and can do violence against its/their enemies, as opposed to what they think
of as an imaginary God. This is why State-worshippers mock the concept of “thoughts
and prayers” in favor of “passing a law.” The State exists, after all, and can organize
people to apply coercive force. But God’s vehicle, the church, no longer has enough
belief behind it (in the West at least) to do the same.

This is also why left-authoritarians tend to take for granted that all ills can be solved
by “praying for relief” to the State, by forming some agency, by appropriating ever
more money. Taxes are secular tithes, and the Gov-fearing man is like the God-fearing
man —you simply cannot pay enough money and respect to the state, because as the
DNC video says outright, “government is the one thing we all belong to.” It’s not about
results, it’s about fealty.

Even though they culturally love the State and hate the Network, it’s important to
note that the left-authoritarians in the US have managed to recently take control of
big chunks of the Network, through placing sympathizers in key positions at Big Tech
companies during the techlash and Great Awokening of the 2010s. (There are incipient
signs of pushback here, though, at places like Netflix and even Google, where the very
wokest are being terminated.)

What do left-authoritarians generally look like from an occupational standpoint? The
body of left-authoritarians are the NPCs paying the NYT monthly subscriptions for the
official “truth,” slavishly turning their heads with every new software update, insisting
that masks don’t work before they do, reliably surging behind the current thing. These
are just foot soldiers, but interestingly the most important left-authoritarians aren’t
the elected officials.

As Yarvin in particular has documented at length, the most important left-authoritarians
are not formally part of the elected State at all. They are the professors, activists, bu-
reaucrats, and journalists.

The key concept is that much of America’s control circuitry has evolved to live outside
the formal state, thereby making it resistant to displacement by democratic election.
They laud “democracy” but avoid it in practice, through dual class stock, tenure for
their bureaucrats and professors, tax-exempt compounding for their foundations, and
ideological purification of their organizations. As with the communists who endlessly
burbled about their “democratic people’s republics” while eschewing elections, the left-

67
66                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



authoritarians don’t actually subject their control of key institutions to a vote.47

There are different names for this left-authoritarian network that controls the state
from outside by “holding it accountable.” We can call it the Paper Belt (which em-
phasizes their Rust-Belt-like technological backwardness), we can call it the Cathedral
(which emphasizes their holiness), we can call it the regime (which emphasizes their
illegitimacy), or we can call it simply the American establishment (which emphasizes
their enduring power). Later we will call it NYT/USD, to emphasize their source of
truth and digital economy relative to BTC/web3 and CCP/RMB.

It’s important to understand that the power of the left-authoritarians comes from
getting the officials of the centralized American State and (more recently) the executives
of the centralized Big Tech Network to crush their enemies.

The main technique is to “manipulate procedural outcomes”, often by getting something
true to be officially deemed disinformation (as in the example of the pre-2020 election
laptop story), or conversely getting something false to be deemed official truth (as
in the case of the Cambridge Analytica story). The left-authoritarians are the main
proponents of the political power theory of truth, as “truth” is whatever they find
helpful to move political power into action.

When an employee of a media corporation talks about an article having “impact,” for
example, they mean impact in the sense of a government truncheon impacting your
head, via a new rule or regulation. Go read the descriptions of the prizes they award
to each other, and you’ll see them celebrate themselves for making something that was
previously volitional newly mandatory or forbidden. “Our report led to government
action!” Whether that action was the bombing of Libya or the banning of plastic
straws makes no nevermind; impact is impact.

Laws aren’t the only form of impact. Getting someone fired is too. We talk of hit
pieces and cancel culture as if they’re aberrations, but they’re actually the core of
left-authoritarian culture. Recall that the most prestigious thing any establishment
journalist ever did was Watergate: namely, getting a president fired while selling mil-
lions of copies of their newspaper.

This episode has been endlessly romanticized, but here’s a different perspective on
it: the corporate takeover of America we’re supposed to be constantly vigilant for
actually already occured 50 years ago, just from the left, when a few privately-owned
media corporations cooperated to get Nixon fired and the Pentagon Papers leaked,
proving that the control circuitry outside the State was upstream of the mere elected
government and US military.

Now, was Watergate a crime? Sure, but worse than the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution?
Worse than the Nasiriyah testimony? Worse than WMD? Worse than the lies used to

   47They also aren’t diverse, despite how much they caterwaul about the topic. Look at techjournal-
ismislessdiversethantech.com or Haidt’s study of committed progressives that shows the far left to be
far white.

68
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK67



drive America’s many wars? And, relevantly, worse than what JFK did to get elected?
After all, contra his protestations, Nixon may well have been a crook, but as Seymour
Hersh has convincingly reported, so was John F. Kennedy — yet the exposure of his
Watergate-level election shenanigans somehow waited till thirty years after he ascended
to the presidency over one Richard Milhous Nixon.

Anyway, the problem isn’t just the asymmetry of the “accountability” — that’s not
really about hypocrisy, but hierarchy. The problem with America’s left-authoritarians
is also that they’ve built a terrible culture. A society that puts Watergate on a pedestal
is just fundamentally different from one that puts NASA (or SpaceX) on a pedestal.
Because if what’s applauded is putting a man out of work, rather than putting a man
on the moon, there will be a lot of cancellation and not a lot of creation. Firing someone
should be a necessary evil, not the highest good.

We linger on Watergate because it was the moment when the left-authoritarian Amer-
ican Network outside the State became unambiguously ascendant. It was the public
demonstration of a very different model from the left-authoritarian Soviets. The Soviets
had a state-controlled press, but America now had a press-controlled state.

After Watergate, the left-authoritarians knew that they were the boss of the boss, that
they could get the president fired, that they could “hold someone accountable” — and,
conversely, that no one could really hold them accountable in any way. For example,
what was the punishment for printing the “disinformation” that led to, say, the Iraq
War, or the Holodomor? Suspension from social media? Reparations for the dead? Or
nothing? Much easier to pin it all on a single Nixon, or even a Stalin for that matter,
than a decentralized mass of nameless left-authoritarians.48

Two additional points before we move on from our God/State/Network-informed anal-
ysis of the left-authoritarians. First, more recently, as American state capacity has
declined, the left-authoritarians have shifted their targets to the new authorities: the
CEOs of tech companies in particular. They realize on some level that (a) Network >
State in many contexts and furthermore that (b) the Network-aided global ascent of
tech founders and populist leaders could reduce their control over the State, so they
have chosen to (c) strike first by gaining control of those tech companies that have
achieved state-like scale.

Their modus operandi was much the same as it is for influencing the State: use reporting
to harass tech executives into firing people that left-authoritarians don’t like, then push
them to enact policies that left-authoritarians do like — such as “content moderation”
over any message other than that emanating from approved establishment outlets. The
left-authoritarians have even admitted to this in unguarded moments; see for example
this character talking about how “journalism is about raw power” or this admission
that the media’s explicit goal was to use the State as a billy club against the Network
for fun and profit.

   48This school-of-fish strategy is part of the defense. Individuals can be singled out, but a group can
only really be beaten by another group.

69
68                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


Second, an important insight is that behind many of these left-authoritarian journalists
(and activists and nonprofits) is an old-money zillionaire, a nepotistic heir of some kind.
You won’t find someone at The Atlantic criticizing Laurene Powell Jobs, you won’t find
someone at NPR going after Soros, and you won’t find someone at The New York Times
Company that even publicly admits that their boss, Arthur Gregg Sulzberger, is a rich
white male nepotist. This puts their behavior into stark relief: the left-authoritarian
wants to get you fired, or get your boss to fire you, but won’t even mention their boss.
They are fundamentally just dogs on a leash, hit men for old money, assassins for the
establishment.


Blue Network: Left-Libertarians

There is a split among blue Americans. Some of them, the left-libertarians, are actually
best modeled as people of the Network — meaning, the social network. They truly
aren’t primarily loyal to the Democrat party or even the institutions that are upstream
of it, but to their community online — which increasingly diverges from the party line.
These are the deplatformed sex workers, the ones engaging in risky public activism
rather than the ones merely funding it, the anarchists, the journalists so consistent
in their beliefs that they’re actually striking against their nepotistic owners, and the
ethical anti-imperialists. They really don’t identify with the US establishment that
much, even if they sometimes wish it would execute the redistribution strategy of their
dreams. Their primary people are the others in their social network. And that Network
is becoming their new Leviathan.

For the professional protester, for example, they can use the oine tactics from Beau-
tiful Trouble or Roots to Power to laboriously organize an in-person procession outside
a government office. . . or they can do the same thing online by simply posting a hash-
tag and materializing a digital crowd, then going direct with their cause rather than
negotiating with an establishment journalist for exposure. So what’s giving them more
leverage these days: the institutions that surround the legacy State, or the features of
the decentralized Network?

Another factor pushing left-libertarians away from the US establishment is the strong
left-authoritarian shift towards holiness over coolness. Fredrik DeBoer actually dis-
cussed this shift while it was underway, while society was still transitioning from the
old-time religion of Judeo-Christianity to the new doctrine of wokeness:

        Silicon Valley types, by contrast, believe in things. . .Tangible values about
        progress and culture. The Californian ideology plus the blockchain or what-
        ever. There’s content there. . .

        The media has none of that. The old school media values of truth telling
        and muckraking have long since been abandoned by the media itself, as real
        values require sincerity and media culture abhors sincerity. You can’t sit
        on Twitter all day telling shitty jokes about how nothing matters and then
        turn around and say “but also we’re the guardians of truth and democracy.”

70
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK69



         If Silicon Valley has captured the value of media for shareholders and is
         slowly strangling the industry to death, righting the course will require
         people within media who are willing to stand up and say, “Here are my
         values. They are what they are. I embody them without irony and thus I
         am vulnerable. If you value these things too you have to fight to save our
         industry.” Such a position would require a willingness to leave blank sarcasm
         aside and to start writing again for the world instead of only writing to
         appear clever to other writers. Can the media make this kind of move? I
         don’t see how they can; the social capture of the entire industry is just far
         too acute.

As smart as this post was, things didn’t work out quite as DeBoer expected. The push
toward sincerity — towards filling that God-shaped hole — ended up cleaving the blues
in two.

That is, contra DeBoer’s forecast (“I don’t see how they can”), some of the earnest
blues actually did declare themselves champions of “moral clarity”, and have now gone
over purely to unironic State-worship, to applauding multi-day prayer vigils with Liz
Cheney for the wrongs visited upon their sacred Capitol. As Glenn Greenwald has
written about at length, there’s no daylight anymore between the Democrats and the
Department of Defense, no criticism of the Central Intelligence Agency by CNN.

This fusion wasn’t the full communism that DeBoer sometimes claims to prefer, but it
was a fulsome declaration of values by the media49 nevertheless. It’s the culmination of
the trend towards devout wokeness that Scott Alexander identified years ago in “Gay
Rites are Civil Rites.” The left-authoritarians have done to wokeness in a few years
what Nietzsche noted had been done to Christianity over the span of eons: namely,
they’ve transformed it from a revolutionary ideology into a ruling-class ideology.

But every action has a reaction, every activity spawns a Soros-like reflexivity, and Scott
Alexander was actually ahead of the curve again here as well. Before “Gay Rites are
Civil Rites”, he also identified a second dynamic of relevance, the trend away from
devout wokeness that he described in “Right is the new Left.” And this brings us to
back to the left-libertarians.

The kind of blue that listens to Gray Zone, Red Scare, or Jimmy Dore is repelled by
State worship. They don’t want to choose something as down the middle as pledging
allegiance to the American flag and the national security state for which it stands. They
actually believed the things they said against the establishment, and don’t endorse it
simply because it’s ostensibly “their” team now wearing the NSA headsets.



   49All blues aren’t in media, but to first order all media are blue. As CPI found, 96% of journalist
political donations went to Democrats.

71
70                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


Blue State vs Blue Network

The left-libertarian subgroup of blues has begun to flirt with decentralized media and
web3, because they’re realizing the Network could be more interesting than the declin-
ing American State. Could Substack be more remunerative than Sulzberger? Could
Satoshi’s community deliver more for them than Bernie’s? If they need to redefine
all that as “socialism,” so be it! And if their funding stream is changing, their ide-
ology is slowly shifting too. Yes, they may have started as mere pawns of America’s
left-authoritarian establishment, but what they value is increasingly coming from the
decentralized global Network rather than the centralized American State. So they are
beginning to uncouple. And that’s the emerging Network-vs-State division within blue
tribe.



Red Tribe: Secular Nationalists, Internationalist Capitalists

Each member of red tribe, the conservatives, will also have to make a choice in the
years to come: do they believe in the founding principles encoded in the Bill of Rights
and the Constitution, or will they simply enforce whatever edicts emanate from an
increasingly malign US establishment — supporting statists in practice? Is their def-
inition of “America” commensurate with a world where the US federal government is
itself the most determined opponent of liberty, inflating away their savings, decon-
structing conservative America’s culture, and surveilling them at all times? Or do they
believe American cities and states deserve digital self-determination? In short, will the
American nation choose the decentralized Network or the centralized State?

This will eventually be a conscious choice. Right now, it’s an unconscious three-way
split. The three-legged stool of Reaganism — the religious conservatives, the secu-
lar nationalists, and the internationalist capitalists — side with the God, State, and
Network Leviathans respectively.

These are their primary identities, because they correspond to that thing which they
think of as the most powerful force in the world: almighty God, the US military, or
(implicitly) the global network of trade and communication that will soon simply be
identified with cryptocurrency.


Red God: Religious Conservatives

During the Cold War, religious conservatives believed in an almighty God, unlike the
“godless communists” they fought against. Today, the people of God among the reds
have sharply reduced numbers, but their moral compass remains the man on high.
Insofar as there is a religious revival, it may be driven by the One Commandment-
based startup societies we describe later on. See Rod Dreher on the Protestants,
Adrian Vermeule and Sohrab Ahmari on the Catholics, and Tablet’s Big Tent to get a
sense of their views.

72
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK71


Red State: Secular Nationalists

The people of the State among the reds are more prominent. These are the secu-
lar nationalists, the national security hawks, the people who may not like the left-
authoritarians but who will nevertheless reflexively support the US in every foreign
intervention. They may agree that the US is trending in a bad direction, but they
think China is far worse. As such, they’re still building drones, coding surveillance,
and cheering videos like this one where the US admits to fomenting the color revolutions
that are often otherwise denied.

I’m somewhat sympathetic to this group — after all, they aren’t burning their own
country down! — but unfortunately, on foreign policy they are helping to burn down
other people’s countries, and often for no good reason.

The issue is that in the absence of a compelling alternative, or an undeniable collapse,
you’re simply not going to convince a secular nationalist that America and China are
both becoming digital totalitarian states, or that a US establishment that has pushed
half a dozen countries into murderous chaos isn’t quite the moral exemplar that they
think it is.

The reason is because the red statist is a secular nationalist: they don’t have a God,
but they do believe in the State, the good vision of America as a shining city on a hill.
It really doesn’t matter if this doesn’t exist — it’s the USA from their youth and from
their movies. It’s Top Gun America, and they’ll keep paying to watch the inspiring
remakes, not the depressing footage of what the US military actually did in Iraq, Libya,
Afghanistan, and Syria.

There’s both a laudable aspect to this kind of loyalty, and a frustrating one. These
folks are like the Soviet soldiers that dutifully served in Afghanistan. You might argue
they’re fighting for a cause that is at best pointless and at worst evil, and that they’ll
only come home to find their shelves empty and their culture crushed. . . but you have
to acknowledge they’re risking their lives regardless.

Fundamentally, the red secular nationalist often understands how bad the US estab-
lishment is at home, but doesn’t want to hear about the needless destruction wreaked
by the US military abroad. In this they have the opposite set of blind spots from the
blue left-libertarian, who can clearly see the ruin of countries unfortunate enough to
experience a 21st century US “intervention,” yet imagines the same government that’s
a chaotic destroyer abroad can become a benevolent redistributor at home.

In other words, while the red secular nationalist maintains an implicit Hollywood-
movie-style belief in a US military that can beat up anyone, the blue left-libertarian
persists in their belief that the State’s civilian government could fix anything at home
if only enough people willed it. Using the lens of the Leviathans, these are both clearly
ways the State becomes a stand-in for God, in its terrible Father and benevolent Mother
forms respectively.

73
72                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


What about China, huh?

Let’s digress and engage the China point for a second, as it’s the go-to argument of
the red secular nationalist. To paraphrase, the red nationalist often concedes that US
military intervention abroad has been regrettable, but CCP dominance would be so
much worse that we need the US military to not just stick around but to expand and
grow stronger.

The short counterargument is that it may instead be best for countries to rearm, and
take on their own defense – rather than having an increasingly chaotic US try to fight
a Second Cold War on others’ behalf in the middle of an internal Cold Civil War and
what might become a Second Great Depression.

That is, we get there by a different route, but we arrive at much the same conclusion as
an isolationist rightist or an anti-imperialist leftist. Whether you think America is too
good for the world, or whether you think it’s an ill effect on countries abroad, or some
complex combination of both, we may want (and observe) US military withdrawal and
regional rearmament rather than a Second Cold War.

What’s the long-form version of the argument? Start with the observation that the
CCP is more oppressive at home than the US establishment, but it’s also empirically
less destructive abroad.

Why? Not because of benevolence, but because the CCP is checked by the US military
abroad. Thus China is focused on building up Africa while America is blowing up the
Middle East. Yes, you can argue the Chinese are building colonies in Africa. . . but
they’re functional colonies, with new roads and ports to carry raw materials, unlike the
blasted hellscapes left by US military intervention in Iraq, Syria, Libya, and the like.
With that said, we should have no illusions: China’s neighbors in Southeast Asia know
the dragon would throw its weight around without a US military presence. Right now
it can’t, because China is boxed in by the US military. Conversely, at home the CCP
has no organized domestic political opposition, so it can be absolutely ruthless.

The US establishment has the opposite set of constraints: unlike China, it doesn’t face
organized military opposition abroad, so it’s highly incautious in its foreign policy. But
also unlike the CCP it does face organized domestic political opposition at home, so it
can’t be as ruthless domestically as it wants to be.

Let’s drill into the domestic point first, and then the military point.

It’s really crucial to understand that the US establishment is not more ethical than
the CCP when it comes to civil liberties. It’s just less competent! After all, the US
establishment also does warrantless surveillance via the NSA, unconstitutional search
and seizure via the TSA, arbitrary confiscation of property via civil forfeiture, and so on.
And that’s just what’s already been rolled out — the ambitions of the US establishment
are just as totalitarian as the Chinese state’s, as we can see from its partially failed
attempts at disinformation agencies, civilian disarmament, digital censorship, and the
like. Up to this point, these pushes have not been thwarted by the “ethics” of the

74
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK73



US establishment, but by some combination of political opposition, Constitutional
constraint, and bureaucratic incompetence.

They keep trying, though. The US establishment isn’t organized enough to coordinate
all the pieces, but unfortunately the recently captured Google, Amazon, Apple, and
Microsoft are capable of that level of coordination, as we saw during the Parler deplat-
forming, and the Tiananmen-like censorship of the “whistleblower.” So we’ll see what
happens.

Now on the military point.

During the Cold War, the Soviet constraint meant the US was more cautious in its
interventions, and actually generally achieved far better results. South Korea was
better off than North Korea, West Germany was better off than East Germany, and
Taiwan was better off than Maoist China. Even given all the lies on all sides around
Vietnam, had the US won in South Vietnam, it’s quite possible that would have been
a South Korea too; but because it lost, countless people had to flee and communism
claimed many lives in Southeast Asia.

After the Cold War ended, however, the US military became a hyperpower - and
gradually evolved into a global fomenter of chaos rather than the generally conservative
guardian of stability it was before 1991. The Iraq War can be seen as a transition point,
as can Samantha Power’s R2P doctrine that left Syria in ruins. By 2022, the question of
whether America produces chaos with its military interventions can hardly be gainsaid
— even the most committed American nationalist is hard pressed to name a country
that’s better off after a recent US military intervention, something that wasn’t that
hard to do from 1945-1991.50

OK, so let’s put it all together.

There is truth to the idea that the US military is checking China, and that China
would act more aggressively in the absence of the US military. . . but it’s true in the
same way the Soviet military was once checking the US, and then the US military
acted more aggressively in the absence of the Soviet military. That is, it’s true that
the Soviet military was on balance not a force for good during 1945-1991, but it’s also
true that the US military has on balance not been a force for good during 1991-2021.

It’s complicated. Even if their military did in some sense restrain the US from randomly
blowing up the Middle East, it’s tough to argue that you’d still want the Soviet Union
to still be around to limit US military intervention. Similarly, it’s hard to contend that
the price of constraining China’s lawful evil ambitions in East Asia should be tolerance
for America’s chaotic evil interventions in the Middle East, that defending against a

   50No, Ukraine doesn’t count. The US military failed to deter, pushed the country into another
Syria-like conflict, and has basically been using Ukrainians to bleed Russians in a proxy war. A
million Ukrainian refugees, their country blown to smithereens, thousands dead, soaring gas prices in
Europe, a radicalized Russian population, and the threat of WW3 or even nuclear war - this is just
chaos, rather than competent deterrence.

75
74                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



potential Chinese drone armada should mean acceptance of endless destabilization by
the US military.

Ideally there’s a third way, a better choice - and that third way may simply be decentral-
ized defense, where countries like Japan and Germany re-arm, rather than outsourcing
everything to the US or folding to China. This has its own issues, of course — but if
we’re moving back into the 1800s and 1700s, as per the Future is Our Past thesis, lim-
ited wars between gold-limited great powers are arguably preferable to gigantic global
conflicts between unlimited superpowers.

In short: the secular American nationalist has an option that doesn’t involve either
capitulating to China or pretending the US military is currently achieving fruitful
things abroad. That third way is to support regional rearmament rather than fighting
everyone else’s wars on their behalf.


Red Network: Internationalist Capitalists

Getting back to our original topic, the third group within red tribe are the interna-
tionalist capitalists. We identify them as people of the Network. This is arguably
something of a retcon, because the internet as we currently know it was barely a factor
during the Cold War.51 However, this subgroup involved the folks in favor of commerce
and trade networks, both within and across borders — the capitalists.

Today, that kind of capitalism is almost synonymous with internet startups and tech-
nology. The most valuable companies in the world were born on the Network. And
the future of network capitalism is crypto-capitalism, because it’s not just transactions
that can be represented on-chain — it’s entire financial statements, and companies
themselves, and eventually the entire economy.

The rise of Bitcoin means red people of the Network have a very specific way to think
about their Leviathan, something distinct from both God and the State. Because BTC
cannot be seized with one click by either the US or Chinese governments, it’s a symbol
of international freedom and prosperity that is more powerful than any State.

On balance, I’m sympathetic to this group as well, but it has its own internal issues.
For one thing, Bitcoin Maximalism in particular is similar to Woke Capital in its funda-
mentalism. The main difference is that maximalism is zealous mononumism (devotion
to a single coin) rather than monotheism (a single god) or monostatism (a single state).
The Network doesn’t make the fanatical aspect of humanity vanish; it just moves it
from God or the State to the Network.


Red State vs Red Network

We now see that the God, State, and Network Leviathans all have their supporters
within the conservative movement.

   51See also this section on “Culture” as a third force alongside Church and State in Jacob Burckhardt’s
Force and Freedom from the mid 1800s. It maps to our concept of the Network, before the Internet.

76
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK75



An interesting point is that secular nationalists, being dispositionally conservative, can
often stick with a symbol long after its substance has changed. Think about the many
“Russian nationalists” who stuck with the Soviet Union even when it was a complete
inversion of what had existed prior to 1917. Then compare this US Army ad from 2008
with this recent ad from 2021.

So, in the event of any conflict between the Network and the State, such as a possible
struggle between the inflating dollar and the deflationary Bitcoin, the right-statists
could take the side of the national flag while the right-capitalists take the side of the
digital currency. That is, if and when it’s clear that the continuation of American
empire depends on the ability to continually inflate, the people of the State may side
with the legacy state, and the people of the Network will side with the decentralized
network.52 So, that’s the Network-vs-State division within red tribe.


The Realignment

If we add up all these pieces, we get a possible future where the left- and right-
libertarians from both parties line up against the left- and right-authoritarians.

We’re already starting to see this if we look at Substack vs establishment journal-
ists, Tucker Carlson and Glenn Greenwald vs Fox News/NYT, BTC vs USD, web3 vs
Big Tech, the migration of ethnic minorities to the Republicans and the migration of
neoconservatives to the Democrats.

People have talked about zombie Reaganism, but in this scenario a new coalition would
be finally popping into view. And it’s a totally different carving of the political spec-
trum than the Reagan era. Rather than nationalists and capitalists (the right) against
internationalists and socialists (the left), it’s internationalists and capitalists (left- and
right-libertarians) against socialists and nationalists (left- and right-authoritarians).53

That Realignment would be the Network against the State. The authoritarians would
outnumber the libertarians domestically, and have the institutions on their side. But
the libertarians would have stronger individual talent, as they’d draw the iconoclasts,
and they’d also draw support from the rest of the world.


2.5.2 Tech vs Media, aka PC vs PC

Let’s switch gears here and apply the lens of the Leviathans to a different conflict.
Why are global technology and the US establishment at odds?

      Economics. You can say it’s because technology disrupted everything from Madi-
         son Avenue to Hollywood, as argued here. Looking at just the 80% drop in US

   52Where do the red people of God land up? Well, it’s a wildcard, but some will stick with the
devil they know, the state they grew up with, while others may bet on Bitcoin to enable the Benedict
Option and opt out of a sinful society.
   53In the language of the political compass, the Reagan era was right-vs-left, whereas the Network-
vs-State era would be top vs bottom.

77
76                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



         media revenue alone from 2008 to 2012, it’s hard to believe that wasn’t a factor.

      Geography. You could note that the pre-2020 center of technology was Silicon
         Valley, which is 3000 miles away from the Bos-Wash corridor that houses the US
         establishment.

      Demographics. You can claim it’s because tech is largely immigrant and the US
         establishment is 20-30 points whiter. Certainly by the high evidentiary standards
         of America’s leading disparate impact analysts and critical race theorists, this fact
         alone is prima facie evidence that the US establishment is institutionally racist
         towards their tech disruptors.

      Psychology. You can contend it’s due to a psychological difference between techni-
         cal/financial types vs social/political elites, between people who focus on what is
         true versus those who care about what is popular. This relates to the distinction
         between technical and political truths.

      Metabolism. You might observe that the rivalry is particularly pronounced be-
         tween US tech and media. The other arms of the US establishment, like academia,
         Hollywood, and government all needed multi-year cycles to ship anything, while
         only the news media had the 24/7 metabolism to match tech’s DNA. So they
         became the point of the spear for the US establishment’s counterattack. This
         is also why tech favors newsletters, podcasts, slide decks, and other types of
         fast-turnaround content that the establishment doesn’t natively specialize in.

      Bifurcation. You can remark that there’s a deep structural similarity between
         a socialist professor and technologist founder: both feel like they should be in
         charge. That’s why tech is a cultural fork of the US establishment, just as the
         US itself was a fork of the British Empire. It’s the same root, different branches.
         The ambitious intellectual who would in a previous life have become an academic
         theorist, jurist, or journalist is now a founder, engineer, or investor.54 Because
         there’s a common thread between media and tech, which is the handling and
         presentation of information. Computer science took it one step further: it col-
         lapsed the distinction between the word and the deed, and turned a generation
         of intellectuals into software CEOs. Many people who previously thought they’d
         just advocate for a law to be passed and not worry about the details found out
         how hard it was to build things, to manage people, to turn a profit, to be the
         one in the arena. They became people of the Network. And then they came into
         conflict with those who remained people of the State.

All of these are factors. But the last one probably gets to the root of the issue, because
fundamentally, tech-vs-media is a clash of Leviathans.

   54Sometimes literally, as in the case of Messrs. Graham, Thiel, and Moritz respectively. Paul
Graham was an academic computer scientist at Harvard, Peter Thiel has spoken about how he might
have gone for a Supreme Court clerkship, and Mike Moritz was a journalist before he became a venture
capitalist.

78
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK77


After all, the immigrant technologist moves between countries while keeping their tech-
nical skills and network connections. For them, the Network provides their primary
community, while the State is secondary. Conversely, the American establishmentarian
gains their power from the State. It is all about passing a law or influencing a pol-
icymaker. And if the Network interferes with this process, perhaps by giving people
access to information that undermines the State? Then so much for the Network.

Tech-vs-media is then best understood as a collision of fundamental values, between
the people of the Network and the people of the State.


The Conflict: Technological Progressives vs Technological Conservatives

You can think of the “people of the Network” as technological progressives, and the
“people of the State” as political progressives (charitably) or technological conservatives
(perhaps more realistically).

Both are seemingly aligned at a high level on the goal of solving problems like controlling
COVID-19, building housing, or reducing car crashes. But the people of the Network
usually start by writing code and thinking about individual volition, whereas for the
people of the State the first recourse is passing laws and collective coercion.

Put another way, the people of the Network start by thinking about getting a piece
of the network to call their own. A domain name, something they can build up from
scratch, starting with a bare website like reddit.com and ending up with a massive
online destination that everyone voluntarily seeks out. The primary goal of the tech-
nological progressive, the tech founder is to build — and for no one to have power over
them.

By contrast the people of the State start by thinking about capturing a piece of the
state. To win an election, to influence legislation via a nonprofit, to write an article
that has “impact” in the sense of impacting policy, to be appointed Undersecretary of
something or other. . . this is their mindset. The goal is to get a piece of this gigantic
baton that is the government, to get a club to coerce people (for their own good of
course), to maybe get a little budget along the way, and to finally “change the world”
by changing the policy. To make something that was previously discretionary either
mandatory or forbidden, to redirect the flow of printed money, to exert force through
the law. The primary goal of the political progressive is thus the opposite of the
technological progressive: their goal, verbalized or not, conscious or not, is to exert
power over others.

Now, this is a caricature. Of course there are good people of the State, just like there
are bad people of the Network. It is possible to use a minimal amount of coercion for
good against genuinely bad actors; this truth is the difference between minarchism and
anarchism.

But obviously, these worldviews collide. One group wants no one to have power over
them, while the other seeks to exert power over others.

79
78                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


As a possible future scenario, one way this could be resolved is if the people of the
State use the law to smash American tech over the 2020s, thereby gaining more power
domestically. But tech has already gone global thanks to remote work, and most
technologists are immigrants already. . . so the people of the Network may simply shift
their attention overseas — or not come in the first place. So the federal action would
merely drives away immigrant founders, and the American State would lose power on
a global scale. (Local and state governments in the US may respond differently, which
is an intriguing twist).

The same thing is also happening in China, by the way, where many of the most able
technologists are now alighting for new countries — and no longer coming to the US,
where they aren’t welcome anyway.


The Enormous State, not the Entrepreneurial State

As a bit of a sidebar, a frequent argument that American people of the State make is
that the people of the Network owe their very existence to the State. After all, was it not
their god, the US government, that funded the internet? Do we not need public monies
to back basic research? And shouldn’t the people of the Network therefore dutifully
bow their heads and submit, joyfully paying ever more in tribute to the sacred Uncle
Sam?

There are a few responses to this. One is that the antecedent of the people of the
Network were the pre-internet industrialists, who certainly were not well treated by
the State in the early 1900s. Another is that while the UK similarly gave rise to the
US in some sense, Americans do not genuflect in the direction of the British Isles five
times per day.

But the deepest response starts by acknowledging a kernel of truth: there was a period
from roughly 1933-1970 when the centralized US government did the Hoover Dam, the
Manhattan Project, and Apollo. The transistor and early internet came out of this era
as well. And there were some later innovations also catalyzed by the State (albeit often
by non-bureaucrats who managed to commandeer bureaucrat funds) like the Human
Genome Project and the self-driving car.

However, both before and after this period, the centralized State was not the locus
of technical and scientific innovation. That should be obvious today for anything in
digital technology; academia has been raided by tech companies and venture capitalists.
But it’s also true for the period before the (well-intentioned) Vannevar Bush memo
that kicked off the government centralization of science. After all, most of physics —
from Newton to Maxwell to Einstein — was discovered before the National Science
Foundation (NSF) was even created.

That said, let’s talk about the 1933-1970 period itself. This period of “peak state”
was real, but in overstated form it has become the basis for books like Mazzucato’s
Entrepreneurial State — which I disagree with, and which Mingardi and McCloskey
have rebutted at length in the Myth of the Entrepreneurial State.

80
2.5. PEOPLE OF GOD, PEOPLE OF THE STATE, PEOPLE OF THE NETWORK79


Here’s why I disagree with the thesis of the Entrepreneurial State:

      The name itself is oxymoronic. As macroeconomists never tire of telling us,
        governments aren’t households, because unlike actual entrepreneurs the state
        can seize funds and print money. So there is no financial risk, and hence nothing
        of “entrepreneurship” in the entrepreneurial state.

      The book doesn’t consider the fact that most math/physics/etc was invented
        prior to the founding of NSF, and therefore doesn’t need NSF to exist.

      It further doesn’t acknowledge that it was possible to do science and technology
        before the massive centralized state, through the distributed model of the “gen-
        tleman scientist,” and that this model is returning in the form of open source and
        (now) decentralized science.

      It doesn’t take into account the waxing and waning of centralized state capacity
        due to technology.

      It doesn’t contend with the state-caused slowdown in physical world innovation
        that happened during the post-1970 period, which Thiel, Cowen, and J Storrs
        Hall have all documented.

      It doesn’t look at how difficult VC or angel investing actually is, so it doesn’t
        really ask whether those “investments” by the state had real returns.

      Most importantly, it doesn’t engage with the counterfactual of what would hap-
        pen if we had many independent funding sources, rather than a single centralized
        state.

So, it’s true that there was a period mid-century where all other actors besides the US
and USSR were squashed down and centralized states dominated innovation. But it’s
not because they were necessarily better at innovating, it’s because they were better at
dominating, due to the centralized tech of that time. It was more about the Enormous
State than the Entrepreneurial State. And that’s why the technological progressives of
the Network don’t reflexively genuflect before the political progressives of the State.


2.5.3 The Base-Rater as a Flat-Curver

Someone who worships an almighty God won’t readily change their beliefs. Neither
will someone who worships an almighty State.

Once in a while, a religious millenarian’s belief is put to the test when there’s a concrete
prediction made by the faith that doesn’t pan out. That’s also what happened for the
“secular” believers in communism when the Berlin Wall and then the Soviet Union
fell. These events are always fascinating for the non-believer - whether it’s Heaven’s
Gate, QAnon, “Mueller Day,” or the “withering of the state”, it’s interesting to see what
happens when a prophecy doesn’t work out.55

  55Not all prophecies fail, though. JFK did get a man on the moon prior to 1969. Einstein was

81
80                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Indeed, that’s why people wrote books like The God that Failed when they turned away
from communism. A Leviathan had given up the ghost. Whether that Leviathan was
God itself or the State, it was a crushing collapse of faith. As per the book of the same
title, Everything Was Forever, Until It Was No More.

This offers a useful way of thinking about the blue and red statists alike, the left-
authoritarians and the secular nationalists we discussed earlier. The American State is
their God replacement, and they truly can’t envision a world without it. Whether they
think of it in terms of “the Constitution” (the conservative framing) or “our democracy”
(the progressive framing), the civic religion of the US is their religion, especially when
faith in God has fallen off a cliff.

So, they may not be dispassionately rational when forecasting whether their God, the
State, might fail. There are three ideas that are helpful here.

      The first idea is Flatland. The premise of Flatland is that it’s a 2D plane,
         and entities within Flatland can’t really understand 3D things. They encounter
         spheres as circles that start as points, expand to their maximum radus, and then
         contract back down.

      The second idea is the premise that historical time is far longer than human time.
         We live on a tiny piece of a grand historical curve, a trajectory that looks flat to
         us over months and years, because historical time (usually) moves slowly.

      The third idea is what Tyler Cowen diplomatically calls a “base-rater”, the es-
         tablishment type who essentially thinks everything remains constant. This is the
         kind of person who’ll sardonically remarks “Oh, this time is different, huh?”, not
         realizing that (a) they’re quoting that statement out of context, and (b) the ob-
         viously fallacious opposite of that saying is the assertion that “things will never
         change.”

Put these ideas together and you start to get a mental model of the base-raters, the
blue and red statists. They think everything will always stay the same, that it’ll stick
at a base rate.

The only cycles they’re familiar with are short ones: the cycle of breath over a few
seconds, the cycle of sleep over one day, and the cycle of seasons over one year. But
they aren’t familiar with any cycle that extends beyond one human life, because they
usually don’t know much history beyond what the establishment has pointed them
towards.

Because they don’t think about cycles, they don’t think about curves. They live on a
kind of Flatland, except rather than being flat as in the sense of two-dimensional, it’s
flat as in the sense of a curve with zero-derivative. But as Ray Dalio has noted, things
may not stay flat in historical terms for long. As such, the blue and red statists may

correct that an atomic bomb could be built. Elon Musk did manage to get reusable rockets to work.
The best technological prophecies are anchored in physical feasibility, not just human belief.

82
2.6. IF THE NEWS IS FAKE, IMAGINE HISTORY                                                            81



be in for a rude shock. Using the lens of the Leviathans, they really think their God,
the State, can never fail.



2.6 If the News is Fake, Imagine History

The collision of Leviathans has knocked something loose. Access to all that information
from the Network has changed our perception of the present, and with it the perception
of the past. The historical inevitability and (even more importantly) the desirability of
the US establishment’s victory over all opponents is now very much in question. Both
outside and inside the US, there’s the sense that the US-dominated postwar order is
either on its last legs or already over, and that the ancient legislators and endless
remakes reflect a fading culture trying to hang on by its fingernails to prevent what
comes next.

Though people are gearing up as if on autopilot for a Second Cold War, it’s not obvious
that the US will make it out of the first round given its internal Cold Civil War. The
decline in state capacity, in internal alignment, in budgetary resources, in wherewithal,
and in political will is tangible. It’s true that the most dedicated establishmentarians do
still operate as if the empire will always be there. But the question of what America’s
role in the world should be next remains unanswered, because the question of what
America represents at home remains unanswered.

Within the US, groups on both right and left are now asking themselves in different
ways: are we the baddies? The left asks whether the US is institutionally racist, the
right asks whether the US is irredeemably leftist, and more factions on each side56 want
a national divorce.

As we can see from the graphs, America is not really a single “nation state” anymore;
it’s at least binational, with two warring groups. There’s been a collapse in institutional
trust, and in each other. And the questions now arising are fundamental.

      Is the US establishment a force for good in the world?

      Is the US establishment a force for good at home?

      Would others copy today’s America of their own free will?

      Would the US establishment tell you the truth?

      Was it ever a force for good at home or abroad?

   56The blue side has written It’s Time for a Bluexit (TNR 2017), Maybe It’s Time for America to
Split Up (NYMag 2018), and The Case for Blue State Secession (The Nation 2021). The red side
has put out The Case for American Secession (Malice 2016) and National Divorce is Expensive, But
It’s Worth Every Penny (Reaboi 2021). For an overview of both, see An American Secession? It’s
Not that Far-Fetched (Bloomberg/WaPo 2021) and How Seriously Should We Take Talk of US State
Secession (Brookings 2021).

83
82                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


My perhaps idiosyncratic answers to these questions are: no, no, no, no, and yes. No, I
don’t think the US establishment is nowadays on balance a force for good abroad or at
home, or that the US model would be cloned today by someone setting up a new state,
or that the US establishment can be trusted to tell the truth. I do, however, think the
Cold War America of 1945-1991 was on balance better for its citizens and allies than
its Soviet opponents.

But while I can justify57 these answers, my responses aren’t as important as why these
questions are arising in the first place. The reason is that the US establishment has
lost control over the narrative. The distortion of the present, and the past, has caught
up to them.


2.6.1 Distortion of the Present

“If the news is fake, imagine history.” This pithy tweet reverses Orwell, because he who
is acknowledged to be faking the present can no longer distort the past. That is, once
enough people see that the establishment has been lying about today’s events, they
naturally begin to think the establishment might have been lying about yesterday’s
news as well.

To calibrate this, let’s start with a grab bag of media failures from the recent present,
the last 5-15 years or so. You’ll no doubt have your own list.

      Remember the “oops” on the Iraq War, after the media corporations that were
        supposed to “hold the government accountable” instead helped justify the invasion
        of Iraq under false pretenses?

      Remember the thousands of reports on “Russiagate” that completely disappeared
        after the Mueller report?

      Remember when the NYT said Hillary Clinton had a 91% chance to win, giving
        the strong impression that the 2016 election wasn’t even close?

      Remember the detailed, emotional, multipart Caliphate podcast, endorsed by
        Sam Dolnick, a senior member of The New York Times Company’s ruling Ochs-
        Sulzberger family, which turned out to be completely fake?

      Remember the Miles Taylor episode, where a junior functionary was falsely rep-
        resented as a senior administration official?

      Remember when Sulzberger’s employees published editorial after editorial against
        free speech, before they pretended they were for it, before they opposed it again?

      Remember when they said YouTube’s remaining freedom of speech was a bad
        thing in the US, and then praised its freedom of speech the next day when it was
        helpful in getting their content into Russia?

  57See Bitcoin is Civilization and Great Protocol Politics for theses on domestic and foreign policy.

84
2.6. IF THE NEWS IS FAKE, IMAGINE HISTORY                                                 83


      Remember when Kara Swisher reported that innocent high school student Nick
        Sandmann had done something wrong for merely standing still in front of a man
        who strode up to him pounding a drum?

      Remember when Kara Swisher’s Recode also said COVID-19 was “contained,”
        before it ended up killing more than a million Americans?

      Remember all the official disinformation on COVID, how they called people
        racists for warning about it, and said that masks didn’t work before they did?

      Remember when everyone switched sides on vaccines, and everything else related
        to COVID, as Michael Solana ably chronicled here?

      Remember when the US establishment published reports credulously predicting
        that inflation would be transitory?

      And remember when there was minimal mainstream coverage of the 2017 battle
        for Mosul, the world’s largest military operation since the invasion of Iraq in 2003,
        the war that Obama was supposed to have ended?

You probably didn’t remember that last one, mainly because there was minimal cov-
erage, but watch this and then ask why you’ve never heard of it before.

In each of these cases, we have something predicted to go to zero that ends up at
millions, or a certainty that winds up a nullity, or a hot war featuring the US military
and 482 suicide car bombings that somehow registered on the public consciousness as
zero.

If the US establishment could erase Mosul from memory in the age of the internet,
you start to see how Putin’s Russia could pretend the 2022 invasion of Ukraine was
just a “special operation.” And you start to realize that it’s not sufficient to simply
“take the articles with a grain of salt”, and discount them a bit. By listening to the
establishment, your perception of reality may be off by one million fold.


Patterns of Information Distortion

There are a few common patterns here, ways in which the information supply chain
has been distorted.

Channel distortion. That which favors the US establishment is magnified 100X, while
that which disfavors it is downranked 100X or silenced entirely, such that the net
distortion is 10,000X or more. We can think of this as analogous to channel distortion
in signal processing. Media corporations aren’t just censors, they’re sensors - and
self-interested ones. That is, they’re ostensibly measuring the world, but they actually
have self-interested reasons for reporting that some numbers are low (like inflation and
crime) and others are high (like whatever social ill they want to address). There are
many such channel distortions, including (a) absence of criticism of media owners, (b)
A/B testing to promote literal hate speech for more clicks, (c) self-referential quoting
to give the impression of impartiality, and so on.

85
84                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Narrative alignment. The way the establishment determines what to put on the front
page out of millions of possible stories should remind you of the political power theory
of history. It’s only things that support the narrative: their favored state policies
will always succeed, their disfavored tech competitors will always fail, their errors are
honest mistakes, your errors are firing offenses, the opponents of the establishment are
x-ists and traitors, free speech is the enemy, and so on. Quantitatively speaking, it’d be
relatively straightforward to use word2vec or something more recent to literally score
and rank stories for their narrative alignment.


Power over truth. In these incidents, if you stop to count, you often realize that the
reports were off not by say 50%, but by 1000X or more. Why do these “reporters” still
have their jobs, then? Because their job wasn’t to make money, but to make power.
That is, they weren’t trying to predict the future correctly for the sake of making good
investments, but to repeat the party line to keep people in line. They’re like actors, in
that their role was to say (or write) the right thing at the right time, to manufacture
your consent, to misinform you about everything from weapons of mass destruction to
the probability of inflation, and to then claim democratic legitimacy after people voted
on the basis of their official misinformation.


Comparison to an aligned sensor. It’s worth comparing the reports by these media
corporations to reports by an aligned sensor, one where there is no way for the sensor
to “win” at your expense by distorting the information it’s giving to you. Your gas
tank does not report that the gas is at 90% before suddenly dropping to 20%. Your
bank account does not zoom up in order to fake you out and get you to buy something
from the bank, and then silently down again, like an establishment journalist trying to
manipulate someone before an election. The metrics on your dashboard at work are
not typically falsified by people to make them more sensational. In each of these cases,
you are receiving reports from either a dispassionate machine or an institution (like
your company) where you have economic alignment and no significant principal/agent
issues. By contrast, the media corporation can report false information to you and still
make money; it has a mind and wallet of its own, unlike the sensors you own.


Network rescue. Note something else: the only reason you are hearing about these
incidents, and the only reason the rebuttals to them ever came out in the first place, is
the Network. It is only because the State’s filtering of social media is not yet complete,
that their downranking of dissident voices not fully efficient, that their late-breaking
attempt to impose speech and thought controls on a free society not fully consummated,
that (a) the initial refutations were even published and (b) that you are seeing some
of them combined into one document.

This last point is worth hovering on. Why do we know about these distortions of the
present? It’s again because of a collision of Leviathans, because the Network routed
information around the State, giving people actual rather than ostensible freedom of
speech.

86
2.6. IF THE NEWS IS FAKE, IMAGINE HISTORY                                                            85



The Network Delivered Actual Freedom of Speech

We elaborate on this in the Fragmentation Thesis, but the Network is accelerating a
great decentralization of Western society that began shortly after the peak centraliza-
tion of about 1950.

Towards the end of this process, in our current era, the US establishment got so fat
and happy that it forgot how aggressive its predecessors had been in imposing speech
and thought controls. Basically, the establishment didn’t realize they’d inherited a
highly regulated, centralized communications apparatus where the vast majority of
Americans had no practical freedom of speech unless they owned a media corporation
or were employed by one.

As such, in the 1990s and 2000s, the American establishment could seem to eat its cake
and have it too — enjoying the rhetorical windfall of claiming to have a free society,
while in practice holding an enormous distribution advantage over the common man
(“never argue with a man who buys ink by the barrel”).

Now, it was true that the US was more free than the USSR, but it is not true that
the US was more free than the Internet. As we discuss later, social media is Amer-
ican glasnost and cryptocurrency is American perestroika. So as the internet scaled,
and Americans actually got the rights to free speech and free markets that they were
nominally promised, the establishment started to feel threatened.

Why? Because while speech only influences volitional behavior (like voting), volitional
behavior in turn influences coercive behavior (like legislating). So, if the US establish-
ment lost control over speech they would have lost control over everything.


The Establishment Launched the Counter-Decentralization

Thus began the great Counter-Decentralization in 2013, the techlash plus the Great
Awokening, what Jack Bratich calls a “war of restoration” by an establishment that
had been economically disrupted by the Network but that retained the capability to
morally denounce its enemies.

The threatened US establishment increased the volume of attacks on their rivals in
both senses of the term; the sheer quantity of attacks and the level of vitriol soared,
as you can see from the charts. Their rivals were basically everyone — tech, Trump,
China, Russia, Israel, Brazil, Hungary, Brexiteers, Macron — everyone that wasn’t a
loyal part of the US establishment’s social network.

And from 2013-2020, against all odds, this multifront campaign seemed to be working.
America’s establishment spent down huge amounts of reputation, but they managed to
wokify Google, Amazon, Apple, and the major tech companies, deplatform Trump and
get him out of office, and terrorize the country with massive riots. They completely
reversed course58 from the Obama era, silently stole the China issue from Trump,

   58Recall that Obama had been generally friendly with tech, called for a “reset” with Russia, dismissed

87
86                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



and polarized relations with Russia. They canceled, deplatformed, demonized, and
dominated for the better part of a decade.

Then, suddenly, after February 2021, there was a distinct slackening of support, of
intensity. The coalition that had predated Trump, that had arguably caused Trump,
didn’t seem to outlive Trump. At the time of writing, it’s hard to tell whether this is
a momentary shift or a permanent one, but social engagement is down. People have
tuned out. The US establishment is only talking to their hardcore supporters now. All
the other social networks they’ve attacked — essentially everyone in the world who
isn’t a true blue American State-worshipper — they aren’t listening anymore.

Instead, they’re reassessing their relationship with the US establishment, and with the
US itself.


2.6.2 Distortion of the Past

The distortion of America’s present has led people to re-evaluate America’s past. Once
they realize they’ve had Gell-Mann Amnesia, they start to wonder if their mental model
is one of Gell-Mann America.

Recall that Gell-Mann Amnesia refers to the phenomenon where you read something
in the paper about an area you have independent knowledge of. Suppose it’s computer
science. When you read articles on the topic, you see grievous falsehoods, and inversions
of cause and effect. Then you turn the page and read about, say, Palestine as if the
reporting on that topic was trustworthy. You forget what you just saw, that the
reporting was flawed in the area where you could independently check it. You get
amnesia.

The mechanistic reason for Gell-Mann Amnesia is the hub-and-spoke topology of the
pre-internet information environment. Suppose you were an expert in computer science,
another person was an expert on Japan, a third knew about the bond market, and so
on. You are spokes that are all connected to the hub (say, The New York Times)
but not each other. Each spoke has superior local information, and can falsify NYT
reports in their own domain, but has no mechanism for coordinating with other spokes,
let alone establishing a superior hub. Until the internet, the blockchain, and the advent
of cryptohistory.

The long-term consequence of Gell-Mann Amnesia is Gell-Mann America. People know
now that we are systematically misled about the present. But at least we live in the
present, so we have local information that can falsify many news stories. We do not live
in the past, so all we know is that we may be wildly off-base in our understanding of
history. There are no people from the past around to give first hand accounts. . . though
we can read their books and sometimes watch their films.

Here are some quick links that may surprise you about the past.

concern over Russia as late as 2012, mocked Trump’s emphasis on China in 2015, and even produced
the relatively pro-China movie American Factory in late 2019.

88
2.6. IF THE NEWS IS FAKE, IMAGINE HISTORY                                                 87


      In 1958, President Nasser of Egypt laughed at the idea that Egyptian women
        would ever be forced to wear the hijab. Surprise: the Muslim world was far more
        secular within living memory.

      After World War 2, Operation Paperclip put reformed German scientists to work
        on the American space program. Surprise: the real Hidden Figures were Nazis.

      Germany sent Vladimir Lenin into Russia, potentially as part of a strategy to
        destabilize their then-rival in war. Antony Sutton’s books document how some
        Wall Street bankers apparently funded the Russian Revolution (and how other
        Wall Street bankers funded the Nazis years later). Leon Trotsky spent time in
        New York prior to the revolution, and propagandistic reporting from Americans
        like John Reed aided Lenin and Trotsky in their revolution. Indeed, Reed was so
        useful to the Soviets — and so misleading as to the nature of the revolution — that
        he was buried at the base of the Kremlin Wall. Surprise: the Russian Revolution
        wasn’t done wholly by Russians, but had significant foreign involvement from
        Germans and Americans.

      The Ochs-Sulzberger family, which owns The New York Times Company, owned
        slaves but didn’t report that fact in their 1619 coverage.

      New York Times correspondent Walter Duranty won a Pulitzer Prize for help-
        ing the Soviet Union starve Ukraine into submission, 90 years before the Times
        decided to instead “stand with Ukraine.”

      Herbert Matthews, also a New York Times correspondent, helped Castro win
        power in Cuba, leading to the murderous Cuban revolution and the subsequent
        Cuban missile crisis that almost resulted in nuclear war.

      Another American “journalist,” Edgar Snow, wrote books such as Red Star Over
        China that praised Chairman Mao to the heavens before, during, and after Mao
        embarked on programs of mass murder and collectivization.

      President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, architect of the US administrative state,
        recruited young men to sleep with gay seamen in order to entrap them.

      The American architect of Bretton Woods, the IMF, and the World Bank, Harry
        Dexter White, spied for the Soviets. He was one of dozens, according to the
        Venona decrypts, declassified after the end of the Cold War.

      Henry Wallace, vice president of the United States during Roosevelt’s term in
        1940, toured the Soviet gulag of Magadan and pronounced it fine and dandy,
        right before he just barely lost the VP nomination for 1944 to Harry Truman —
        who then became president in 1945.

      The “liberating” Soviet Red Army raped its way across Eastern Europe in the
        1940s, the same communists that The Times extolled as giving women a “better
        sex life” in its 2017 anniversary series on the Russian Revolution.

89
88                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



      The NYT’s Otto Tolischus reported Poland invaded Germany in 1939, reversing
         the direction of the Nazi assault.

      Seymour Hersh details in The Dark Side of Camelot how John F. Kennedy’s men
         in Illinois helped rig the 1960 election, an unmentioned scandal a full decade
         before Watergate.

And that’s just59 the 20th century, with a focus on the Cold War!

Once you start seeing that many dissonant facts, plenty of them from the same or-
ganizations like The New York Times Company that call themselves the “paper of
record” and the “first draft of history,” that literally run billboards calling themselves
the “Truth”. . .you start to realize that there is an unreliable narrator problem.

What if Sulzberger is more like Keyser Söze? What if his employees are highly self-
interested professional prevaricators? What if they’ve always been like that? What
if you can’t trust anything they say, and by extension anything the US establishment
says, without checking it yourself?

As the Cold War ended, and the internet rose in the late 1990s, a spate of movies
came out — The Matrix, Memento, The Truman Show, Fight Club, The Game, Men in
Black, The Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind –— all about a constructed reality
where our memories aren’t real. It’s almost as if with the rise of the Network, that
there was a dim realization in the collective subconscious that everyone had been lied
to, deceived, anesthetized, sedated by the centralized States of the 20th century — not
just by the fascists and the communists, but the democratic capitalists too.

Just like someone who grew up in China and migrated to the US in adulthood would
find that they’d have been lied to — that Mao wasn’t really “7 parts good and 3 parts
bad,” but far worse than that — those who grew up in the US and migrated to the
Internet in adulthood are starting to realize that something is up.

The reason is that the American establishment didn’t really understand what the inter-
net would mean for them. Because during the 20th century they’d made obvious-but-
threatening truths, like the existence of Soviet spies in the US, rude to talk about. Then
a progression happened: after the obvious became rude, the rude became unsayable,
the unsayable became unthinkable, and the unthinkable went unthought. And once it
went unthought, it was no longer even thought about as a potential threat. Moreover,
the original people who’d consciously suppressed that obvious-but-threatening truth
had passed away.

So these unthought ideas were then sitting there waiting in a dusty tome, waiting
for someone to happen upon them, and accidentally rediscover them and put them
on the internet. Whether Google Books or Wikileaks or the Soviet archives or the
censorship-resistant web, there are now too many secrets in plain view.

   59The establishment’s hostility to technology has been a constant as well. Here are their early
denunciations of aviation (airplanes will never happen in a million years!) and rocketry (Goddard
doesn’t know physics!).

90
2.6. IF THE NEWS IS FAKE, IMAGINE HISTORY                                                            89



The question now is whether a newly awakened US establishment can use its control
of chokepoints like Google and its various “fact-checkers” to suppress access to these
inconvenient truths, or whether web3-mediated services will make it permanently dif-
ficult for the State to suppress the Network. You as the reader may have some input
on that.


2.6.3 Jurassic Ballpark

As a not-so-side note, in addition to falsified newspapers and history textbooks, your
distorted impression of the past — your Gell-Mann America — likely comes from
movies, to a greater extent than you might think. If you haven’t studied something in
depth, your mental model of it often implicitly reduces to a few scenes from a Hollywood
movie.

Let’s call this phenomenon “Jurassic Ballpark.” If you recall the scene from Jurassic
Park where they splice in amphibian DNA to spackle over the gaps in their genetic
reconstruction, that’s similar to what media consumption has done to your brain.60
You’re unconsciously splicing movie scenes into real-life as a ballpark approximation.
The gaps in your knowledge have been filled in by TV and movies. These are unreliable
narrators. For example:

      What’s your image of the US military? Often something from Top Gun or Trans-
         formers. Even the negative portrayals depict it as all-powerful.61

      What’s it like to run a business? The evil CEO is a TV trope. Countless sto-
         ries cast a corporation with limitless resources62 as the main bad guy, from the
         Terminator franchise to Lost.

      Who’s going to save us from the virus? Why, the competent public servants at
         the CDC, as portrayed in Contagion.

By contrast, you very rarely see depictions of journalists, activists, professors, regula-
tors, and the like as bad guys. The public lacks televised narratives for how people in
those roles can go wrong. That’s why the behavior of journalists in real life was such
a surprise to Paul Graham:

         One of the biggest surprises of my adult life is how unethical reporters are.
         In movies they’re always the good guys.

“In movies they’re always the good guys.” Indeed! If you think about it, superheros
are literally portrayed as journalists (that’s the day job of both Clark Kent and Peter

   60Of course, I’m well aware of the irony that even this reference is itself dependent on a movie!
   61The idea that the US military will win any battle where it really “tries” is the true faith of this age,
believed by anti-imperialist leftists and American Greatness neocons alike. If that changes, everything
changes. In this sense both sides believe in the State Leviathan, though the former thinks of it as
Satan and the latter as God.
   62Even though anyone who actually runs a company is well aware just how limited its resources
really are.

91
90                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Parker), and journalists are likewise portrayed as superheros (see movies like Spotlight
and The Post). The Intrepid Reporter is as much of a stock character as the Evil
Corporation.63 You don’t hear much about the evil reporter, though. You don’t hear
much about the evil communist, either.

Why? More than 20 years ago, Reason Magazine ran a story that still holds up well
today, called Hollywood’s Missing Movies, about how the film industry airbrushed the
drama of the Cold War out of the 20th century. So it’s not just that the movie industry
ran positive portrayals of US establishment journalists, they also ran positive portrayals
of out-and-out communists - but I repeat myself.64

There are exceptions. Once in a while you do see a House of Cards that depicts evil
nonprofits, Democrats, and journalists. Once in a while you do get a Dallas Buyers
Club or Ghostbusters that depicts evil regulators from the FDA or EPA. And more
recently you’ve started to see a few movies that even depict evil communists, not in
the interchangeable cartoon villain sense of a Rocky IV, but in the ideological sense - the
Lives of Others, The Way Back, Bridge of Spies, and the Death of Stalin respectively
depict the spying, gulaging, imprisoning, murdering Communist states for what they
really were.

Still, these are very much exceptions. AI video analysis could quantify this, but if you
took the top N most popular movies and TV shows over the past several decades, in
terms of raw hours of footage watched, I’d bet the world has seen a >1000:1 ratio of
scenes featuring evil capitalists to scenes featuring evil communists.

Of course, these are fictional stories, but as Graham’s quote illustrates, they serve as
real world archetypes. Even the FDA knows what a Tricorder is, and they think of it
as “good” only because it was portrayed as good in Star Trek. But most of the time
biomedical innovators are portrayed as evil, with all the attendant consequences. False
histories shape our reality. We all live in Jurassic Ballpark.


2.6.4 Further Reading

Perhaps you now agree that history has been distorted. But we’ve only scratched
the surface. While we can’t recapitulate the history of the whole world here, we can
recommend some references that show how the past is different than you might think.
We have idiosyncratically categorized them as “techno-economic history” and “20th
century” history. If you click these links and even skim the books, let alone buy and
fully read them, you’ll start to understand the degree of historical distortion in standard
textbooks, newspapers, and movies. And you’ll be equipped to answer the fundamental
questions we raised at the beginning of this chapter.

   63Though it is rarely pointed out on screen just how many of those reporters are, in real life,
employed by evil corporations.
   64This is no exaggeration. Bezmenov and Venona documented this at length. Then read about
John Reed (Lenin’s journalist), Walter Duranty (Stalin’s journalist), Edgar Snow (Mao’s journalist),
Herbert Matthews (Castro’s journalist), and Pham Xuan An & David Halberstam (Ho Chi Minh’s
journalists).

92
2.6. IF THE NEWS IS FAKE, IMAGINE HISTORY                                                 91


First, some reading on techno-economic history:

      patrickcollison.com/fast — how fast construction once was.

      wtfhappenedin1971.com — how many economic indicators went off track in 1971,
        around the time the US got off the gold standard.

      J Storrs Hall: Where’s My Flying Car? — how the world used to be on an
        increasing energy production curve till the regulatory barrier of the 1970s (see
        also the review by Roots of Progress).

      Matt Ridley: How Innovation Works — how tech founders always had to fight
        against the establishment, much like the present day.

      William Rees-Mogg and James Dale Davidson: The Sovereign Individual — how
        the centralized power of the 20th century is actually historically aberrant.

      Ray Dalio: Principles of the Changing Economic Order — how today’s America
        resembles the Dutch and British empires of the past in terms of its monetary
        overextension.

      Peter Turchin: War and Peace and War — how quantitative methods can identify
        recurrent cycles.

      William Strauss and Neil Howe: The Fourth Turning — how a cyclic theory of
        history forecasts a serious American conflict in the 2020s (written in the mid-
        1990s).

      Brian McCullough: How the Internet Happened: From Netscape to the iPhone —
        reminds us that the tech era is very new, only really about 10 years old, and only
        began in earnest with iPhone adoption.

      Kai-Fu Lee: AI Superpowers — how the recent history of the Chinese tech build-
        out in the 2010s shows that they aren’t just copycats.

Then, some reading on 20th Century history:

      Curtis Yarvin: Unqualified Reservations —abroad survey of Western historical
        anomalies, with a focus on the 20th and 19th centuries.

      Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn: The Gulag Archipelago — what the Soviet Union was
        actually like.

      Yuri Slezkine: The House of Government — how the Soviet Union actually
        worked.

      Janet Malcom: The Journalist and the Murderer — how journalists “befriend and
        betray” their subjects for clicks, a book taught in journalism schools as something
        of a how-to manual.

      Antony C. Sutton: Wall Street and the Bolshevik Revolution and Wall Street and
        the Rise of Hitler — how different groups of capitalists funded the communist

93
92                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


        and fascist revolutions respectively.

      Ashley Rindsberg: The Gray Lady Winked — how The New York Times system-
        atically misrepresented the truth over the 20th century.

      Nicholson Baker: Human Smoke — how World War 2 was far more brutal and
        confusing than conventionally conveyed in textbooks.

      Sean McMeekin: Stalin’s War — how Stalin drove WW2, and (among other
        things) sought to push Japan and the US into conflict so he wouldn’t have to
        fight either of them.

      Viktor Suvorov: The Chief Culprit —how Stalin was preparing to attack Hitler
        prior to Hitler’s attack on Stalin; vindicated by some of McMeekin’s work.

      John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr: Venona and Diana West: American Be-
        trayal — how the US was indeed riddled with communist spies before and after
        World War 2.

      Kenneth Ackerman: Trotsky in New York and Sean McMeekin: The Russian
        Revolution — How the Russian Revolution was enabled by overseas money and
        the German High Command in WW1.

      Ioan Grillo: El Narco — Inside Mexico’s Criminal Insurgency —how Mexico is
        far more beset by violence than commonly understood, and how this relates to
        recent American influence.

      Wolfgang Schivelbush: Three New Deals — how Roosevelt’s New Deal was di-
        rectly inspired by fascist Italy and Germany.

      Stephen Kotkin: 5 Questions for Stephen Kotkin — how the Soviets were in the
        final analysis actually devout communists, not cynics.

      Frank Dikötter: The Cultural Revolution — how Mao’s cultural revolution re-
        sembles the wokeness of modern America, with the BLM riots of 2020 proving
        particularly similar.

      Cixin Liu: The Three Body Problem — while fictional, the first chapter of this
        book illustrates the madness unleashed under Maoism, and what the Chinese
        people endured before Deng. See also The Secret Document That Transformed
        China.

      Bryan Burrough: Days of Rage and David Talbot: Season of the Witch — how
        America in the 1970s involved far more violent acts and domestic terrorism than
        is commonly remembered.

      William H. Whyte: The Organization Man and James Burnham: The Managerial
        Revolution — how the US in the 1950s was much more corporatist and signifi-
        cantly less capitalist than is popularly remembered.

94
2.7. FRAGMENTATION, FRONTIER, FOURTH TURNING, FUTURE IS OUR PAST93


      Stephen Wertheim: Tomorrow, the World; The Birth of US Global Supremacy —
        how the US did not achieve world domination by accident, but intentionally set
        out to do so.

      Amity Shlaes: The Forgotten Man — how FDR’s “bold, persistent experimenta-
        tion” helped turn a recession into a Great Depression.

      Adam Fergusson: When Money Dies and Mel Gordon: Voluptuous Panic — the
        monetary and cultural character of the Weimar Republic, and how it resembles
        present day America.

This is focused on the West and in particular 20th century America, but someone who’d
grown up in China could probably prepare a similar list using global sources to debunk
various kinds of CCP propaganda. For example, the fact that North Korea is dark
makes China’s movie extolling their military support for the glorious North Korean
regime a little darker.


2.7 Fragmentation, Frontier, Fourth Turning, Future

            Is Our Past

New countries begin with new stories.

Once we’ve dislodged the “arc of history” from our heads, that thing we didn’t even
know was there, the story that told us of the US establishment’s inevitability and
institutional goodness. . . once we’ve realized just how similar that story is to the USSR’s
similar narrative of inevitability and institutional goodness. . . once we’ve realized we
can’t count on the US establishment to be the “leader of the free world” or even to
successfully manage its domestic affairs anymore. . . what’s left?

We’re going to need new stories. Movies where the big decision doesn’t end up on the
US president’s desk, where the US military isn’t counted on to save us from aliens. News
feeds that don’t put American events by default on the frontpage. Supply chains and
digital services that don’t rely on an increasingly unpredictable and anarchic America.
Stories that decenter the US, in other words, but that still give the world hope.

That movie point is a disorienting one, isn’t it? You might be tempted to say it’s not
important. But it’s all-important. We don’t tell fictional stories about the Kazakhstani
military saving the world because it wouldn’t be realistic. And after 2021, it isn’t
realistic to make stories about the US establishment saving the world either.

For example, a movie like 2011’s Contagion that depicts a competent CDC is now just
too far away from reality to permit suspension of disbelief. So instead we get a movie
like 2021’s Don’t Look Up, which depicts a chaotic America that’s still somehow the
center of events, still the country which the world relies on, but whose internal chaos
causes it to fall short. The next movie in that imaginary trilogy will probably not
center America. What could it center instead?

95
94                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Unfortunately, the default right now would be to center China. The Chinese are after
all putting out blockbuster movies like Wolf Warrior 2 and Battle of Lake Changjin
where they beat the Americans, save the world, and end up as number one. They have
that civilizational confidence. And these movies are not laughable like they would have
been even a decade ago. China is a real contender for the crown, unlike Chad or Chile.
So that’s the set of stories that is waiting in the wings.

One response is to deny this and double down on American nostalgia, rolling out Top
Gun: Maverick and electing people born in the 1940s forever. This is what the US
establishment is currently doing, hanging on for dear life to the postwar order, denying
that any change is underway — and thereby refusing to gracefully adapt.

Another response is to come up with new stories that center neither China nor America,
but that do center certain universal values - and that give a bridge between America
and what comes next, as America itself was a bridge between the British Empire and
the post-WW2 world.

We give four concrete examples in this chapter. But to be clear, just because a story
decenters America doesn’t mean it has to be punitive. That is, these stories don’t
have to condemn the US, anymore than the postwar order of 1945-1991 put the UK
in the dock, or the 1991-2021 order really beat up on the Soviets that much. Indeed,
a new story could well feature past aspects of the US in laudatory ways. The main
commonality is that we need new stories that no longer assume the US establishment
will continue to be at the center of the world, or else people will be psychologically
unprepared for that eventuality.

Another way of thinking about it is that the right kind of new story turns constants
into variables. Just as Bitcoin turned the constant of the US dollar into a variable, we
need new stories that turn the constant of the US establishment into a variable. By
decentering the US establishment in our mental models, we enable decentralization.
We envision a world where the US may not be there for us, because it was not always
there in the past, and may not endure far into the future.

Here are four such stories. The first is the tale of the fragmentation of the postwar
consensus. The second is a generalization of Fredrick Jackson Turner’s frontier thesis.
The third recapitulates the Fourth Turning concept from Strauss and Howe, as well as
Turchin and Dalio’s work, all of which predict significant conflict to come in the West.
The fourth talks about how our future is our past, how the mid-20th century is like a
funhouse mirror moment, and how we are now seeing a bizarre phenomenon where we
repeat past events but get opposite outcomes.

All of them turn constants into variables, as they describe a pre-American era where
the US didn’t yet exist, and thereby prepare us for a post-American period where the
US in its current form no longer exists.

96
2.7. FRAGMENTATION, FRONTIER, FOURTH TURNING, FUTURE IS OUR PAST95



2.7.1 The Fragmentation Thesis

The Sovereign Individual, written in 1999, is an incredible book that nailed many as-
pects of our digital future decades in advance, Bitcoin prime among them. We won’t
recapitulate the whole thing here, but in short the thesis is that after many genera-
tions in which technology favored centralization (railroads, telegraph, radio, television,
movies, mass production) since about 1950 it is now favoring decentralization (transis-
tor, personal computer, internet, remote work, smartphone, cryptocurrency).

So by this measure, peak centralization was about 1950, when there was one
telephone company (AT&T), two superpowers (US/USSR), and three TV stations
(ABC/CBS/NBC). Even though the 1950s are romanticized in the US, and there were
certainly good things about the era, that level of centralization was not natural. This
was an enormous degree of cultural homogenization, conformity, and sameness relative
to the pre-1914 world just a few decades prior. Many aspects of individual initiative,
creativity, and freedom had been dulled down or eliminated in the standardization
process.

Read William H. Whyte’s The Organization Man or James Burnham’s Managerial
Revolution for a portrait of this midcentury time period. At the time, the mid-century
US was more corporatist than entrepreneurial. Yes, the system was capitalism, but
a highly managed and regulated sort of capitalism. It was all about joining the big
company and working your way up, not founding one, except for the rare and just be-
ginning startup phenomenon on the West Coast, which was a million-fold less common
than it is now.

Everything was significantly to the economic left and social right of where it is today.
Yes, the USA wasn’t communist, but it did have 90% top marginal tax rates, to stop
any new people from getting rich and potentially threatening the system FDR built.
Similarly, the USSR was far more socially conservative than is commonly remembered,
doing things like taxing childless women to reduce their status if they didn’t reproduce.

Typically, those who complain about filter bubbles are actually complaining that there
is more than one. Namely, they are annoyed that all information doesn’t derive from
establishment sources only. That situation actually did obtain in the mid-century US,
when tens of millions of Americans all assembled in their living rooms at the same time
to watch I Love Lucy.

Then it all decentralized, fragmented. The story is told in essays like Paul Graham’s
“Refragmentation,” and in The Sovereign Individual. And we call this the Fragmenta-
tion thesis.


2.7.2 The Frontier Thesis

In the late 1800s, Fredrick Jackson Turner gave an influential talk on the concept of
the frontier as the crucial driving force in American history. At that time, it was
understood that the free land of the frontier was crucial to the US in several ways - as

97
96                                                        CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


a way for the ambitious to seek their fortunes, as a national aspiration in the form of
Manifest Destiny, as bare land for social experiments.

Today, of course, the concept of the frontier and Manifest Destiny is not only not
admired, but has been pathologized since the 60s by the same deconstructionism that
is one half of wokeness. You know the story: the American frontiersmen, like Columbus
before them, were racists, colonialists, and imperalists.65

But two points on this before we proceed.

The first is that there were N tribes fighting in the Americas before the arrival of the
Spanish, the British, and the like. The Europeans simply represented tribes N +1,
N+2, and so on. Had one of the Native American tribes developed a technological edge
over any of the European tribes, had they invented oceanic navigation, they would likely
have invaded Europe. We can infer this because (a) when the Mongols had a similar
technological edge they did invade Europe and (b) many North American tribes were
by contemporaneous accounts people accustomed to war. So, it’s old-fashioned, but it’s
probably healthier to think of the Native Americans more like the 300 Spartans than
as helpless victims — brave warriors who fought valiantly but lost to superior forces.

The second is that if you read books like Reich’s Who We Are and How We Got Here, it
makes clear that history is a boneyard. Contra the opening notes of Microsoft’s recent
Ignite conference, there’s probably not a single ethnic group on the planet that simply
peacefully occupied their plot of land since “time immemorial.” One tribe’s homeland
was once their distant ancestors’ frontier.

So, with that as preface, let’s generalize the frontier thesis. One way of thinking about
it is that the frontier actually opened in 1492, well before the founding of the Americas.
What’s little known is that Columbus’ voyage to the New World was in part driven
by the Ottoman blockade of the Eastern Mediterranean; it was an attempt to find an
alternative path to India around the Ottomans, but it ended up using technology to
reopen the frontier in the face of political roadblocks.

From 1492 to 1890, Europeans had what they considered a frontier. It started with
transatlantic navigation and the discovery of the New World, then proceeded to Euro-
pean colonialism, and from there to the independence of the US and Western expansion
via Manifest Destiny. Towards the end of this period, authors like Charles Nordhoff
in Communistic Societies of the United States noted how important the frontier was,
how bad it would be if that avenue for ambitious men was closed off, and how nasty
the Trade-Unionists were getting.

        Hitherto, in the United States, our cheap and fertile lands have acted as
        an important safety-valve for the enterprise and discontent of our non-
        capitalist population. Every hired workman knows that if he chooses to use
        economy and industry in his calling, he may without great or insurmount-
        able difficulty establish himself in independence on the public lands; and,

  65Note again how history informs morality!

98
2.7. FRAGMENTATION, FRONTIER, FOURTH TURNING, FUTURE IS OUR PAST97


        in fact, a large proportion of our most energetic and intelligent mechanics
        do constantly seek these lands. . .

        I do not doubt that the eagerness of some of our wisest public men for
        the acquisition of new territory has arisen from their conviction that this
        opening for the independence of laboring men was essential to the security
        of our future as a free and peaceful state. . .

        Any circumstance, as the exhaustion of these lands, which should materi-
        ally impair this opportunity for independence, would be, I believe, a serious
        calamity to our country; and the spirit of the Trades-Unions and Interna-
        tional Societies appears to me peculiarly mischievous and hateful, because
        they seek to eliminate from the thoughts of their adherents the hope or
        expectation of independence. The member of a Trades-Union is taught to
        regard himself, and to act toward society, as a hireling for life; and these
        societies are united, not as men seeking a way to exchange dependence for
        independence, but as hirelings, determined to remain such, and only de-
        manding better conditions of their masters. If it were possible to infuse
        with this spirit all or the greater part of the non-capitalist class in the
        United States, this would, I believe, be one of the gravest calamities which
        could befall us as a nation; for it would degrade the mass of our voters,
        and make free government here very difficult, if it did not entirely change
        the form of our government, and expose us to lasting disorders and attacks
        upon property.

Nordhoff was right. The aggression of the Trade-Unions eventually led to the commu-
nist revolutions which killed tens of millions of people globally, led to “lasting disorders
and attacks upon property”, and generally became the bane of the world.

We can attribute some of this to the pause, to the closing of the frontier in 1890.
That closing took away paths for ambitious men, and ensured that they couldn’t easily
become founders on their own plot of land - they had to become union organizers, or
revolutionaries, or demagogues of some kind. Without the frontier, it all became zero
sum. And thus we entered the steel cage match of the 20th century between fascism,
communism, and democratic capitalism. There were some important frontier-related
technological developments during this period in space shuttles (and cruise ships!), but
the frontier itself was not open.

Humanity managed to survive through a bloody 20th century. After 1991, the frontier
reopened as commerce on the internet was legalized. By the late 2010s, the combination
of centralization and wokification (in the West) and Xi-ification (in China) threatened
to close this frontier too, but BTC and web3 and the open metaverse have given the
digital frontier a new lease on life.

Today, if we assess where we’re at, there are four possibilities for the frontier: the land,
the internet, the sea, and space. Right now, there are 7.7B people on land, 3.2B on
the internet, about 2-3M on the high seas, and less than 10 currently in space.

99
98                                                             CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



So, practically speaking, an “internet frontier” is easier than the other three. If we’re
lucky, we’ll be able to use the concepts from the network state to reopen the physical
frontier, through a hybrid internet/land strategy, as described in this book.

To summarize, (a) the period of European greatness corresponded to the open frontier
from 1492-1890, (b) the period of total war corresponded to the closing frontier from
1890-1991 which ushered in a necessarily zero-sum world, (c) the peaceful reopening
of the digital frontier could lead us again to a time of greatness, (d) the American and
Chinese establishments are trying to close that frontier and trap us into the same steel
cage match of the 20th century, (e) but with sufficiently good technology we might be
able to escape these political roadblocks and (f) reopen not just a digital frontier, but
a physical one: on remote pieces of land, on the sea, and eventually in space. This is
what we refer to as the generalized Frontier thesis.



2.7.3 The Fourth Turning Thesis

The Fourth Turning and Ages of Discord both predict very significant unrest within
the US in the coming years. Ray Dalio does as well in Principles for Dealing with
the Changing World Order, though he confines most of his comments to monetary
apocalypse. Their models are somewhat related.

The Fourth Turning came out in 1997 and is based on a quasi-cyclical theory of Anglo-
American history, where conflict erupts roughly every 75 years. If you believe in these
patterns and want a possible underlying driver of them, 75 years is about one long
human lifespan. So perhaps those who do not remember66 history really are doomed
to repeat it.

Turchin’s predictions came out around 2008 in a Nature article, and he’s written them
up at length in War and Peace and War. He has impressive timestamped graphs
with specific forecasts as to why conflict will rise, using various measures for societal
instability like elite overproduction and the wage share of the masses.

Dalio’s thesis is that we’re about to experience events that have never happened before
in our lives, but have happened many times before in history. He goes back further than
the Fourth Turning to the British and Dutch empires, and has some quasi-quantitative
analysis to support his view.

All three of these works predict significant physical and/or monetary conflict in America
in the 2020s, and (in Dalio’s case) a consequent changing of the world order. We call
this the Fourth Turning Thesis.


   66Imagine a powered-up, open source, decentralized Google Lens-like thing that could scan the
computational cues in your environment (centralized and decentralized) to match to historical patterns
and tell you whether this looked like a good or bad idea based on thousands of samples from other
people.

100
2.7. FRAGMENTATION, FRONTIER, FOURTH TURNING, FUTURE IS OUR PAST99



2.7.4 The Future Is Our Past Thesis

Take a look at this video of unmixing a fluid. Isn’t that bizarre? You can see the
same process going backward in time, in an unexpected way. This is not the kind of
trajectory we expect to see, but it happens under certain conditions.

And it’s one model for what’s happening in the world, as we redecentralize after a
century of centralization. In other words, an important consequence of the fragmen-
tation thesis is that our future may be more like our past. If peak centralization was
around 1950, with one telephone company (AT&T) and two superpowers (US, USSR)
and three television stations (ABC, CBS, NBC), we grow more decentralized as we
move in either direction from that point.

Essentially, the invention of the transistor in 1947 is like a mirror moment. And as you
go forward and backward in time you start to see events repeating, but as funhouse
mirror versions of themselves, often with the opposite outcome. Our future is our past.
Let’s go through some examples:

      Today, the internet frontier reopens; back then, the western frontier closed.

      Today, we experience COVID-19; back then we experienced the Spanish Flu.

      Today, we have tech billionaires; back then we had the captains of industry.

      Today, founders like Elon Musk and Jack Dorsey seem to be winning against
        establishment journalists; back then, the likes of Ida Tarbell demagogued and
        defeated Rockefeller.

      Today, we have cryptocurrencies; back then we witnessed the era of private bank-
        ing.

      Today, we have a populist movement of digital gold advocates; back then, we had
        a populist movement against gold in the form of the Cross of Gold speech.

      Today, we have the inflation and cultural conflict of Weimar America; back then,
        we had the inflation and cultural conflict of Weimar Germany.

      Today, in Weimar America, we have right and left fighting in the streets; back
        then, in Weimar Germany, we had left and right fighting in the streets.

      Today, the capitalists successfully teamed up with the generals against a sitting
        president; back then, the generals sided with the sitting president against the
        capitalists.

      Today, we have what Turchin considers antebellum-like polarization; back then,
        we had what we now know to be antebellum polarization.

      Today, we have Airbnb; back then, we had flophouses.

      Today, we have Uber; back then, we had gypsy cabs.

101
100                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


      Today, The New York Times sides with Ukraine to fight nationalist Russia; back
        then, The New York Times sided with communist Russia to starve out Ukraine.

      Today, we see the transition from “neutral” to yellow journalism; back then, we
        saw the transition from yellow to “neutral” journalism.

      Today, figures like Mike Moritz think of China as energetic and America as la-
        conic, but back then folks like Bertrand Russell thought of America as energetic
        and China as laconic.

We can think of more examples, with respect to the emerging Second Cold War.

      Today, we’re seeing the Chinese and Russians again line up against the West,
        except this time, the Chinese are the senior partner in the relationship.

      Today, we may see a third group arise outside of the Cold War axis, except this
        time rather than being the “Third World” and non-aligned, it may be “Web3” and
        economically aligned.

      And today, depending on how the economics play out, that third faction may
        come in first, the Second World may come in second, and the former First World
        may end up last.

And if we go back further in time:

      Today, we see a US that’s gradually federalizing into individual states and an
        Indian state that’s unified many subcontinental ethnic groups. Back in the late
        1940s, we saw an India that was gradually centralizing away from individual
        princely states, and a United States that unified many European ethnicities.

      Today, we’re seeing so-far unsuccessful calls for wealth seizures in the US; back
        then, we saw Executive Order 6102, the successful seizure of gold.

      Today, we’re seeing the rise of the pseudonymous founder and startup societies;
        back then, in the 1770s, we saw pseudonymous founders of startup countries.

      Today, we’re seeing the re-encryption of the map; further back in time, before
        1492, maps had terra incognita.

The careful observer will note that these events aren’t all happening in exactly the same
reverse order. It’s not A/B/C/D and then D/C/B/A like a melody. Moreover, the first
set of events is more spaced out over time, while the second is highly clumped together,
with internet-era events years, rather than decades, apart. Finally, the repetition of
each event is often not exactly the same as the previous, but often a “version 3.0.” For
example, Bitcoin is not simply the same as gold, but a version 3.0 that combines some
aspects of gold and some aspects of digitized fiat currencies.

Still, there seems to be something going on. What’s the unifying theory here?

One model, as just discussed in the Fragmentation Thesis, is that technology favored
centralization in the West and especially the US from arguably 1754-1947 (Join, or Die

102
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                                        101



in the French and Indian War, unified national government post-Civil War, railroads,
telegraph, radio, television, movies, mass media in general, and mass production).
And technology is now favoring decentralization from roughly 1950 to the present day
(transistor, personal computer, internet, remote work, smartphone, cryptocurrency).
So, in the West, the grip of the centralized state has begun to slacken. The East is
a different matter; after a century of communism, socialism, civil war, and Partition,
China and India are more internally unified than they’ve been in a long time.

Before we immediately jump to thinking that world is ending, though, we should note
that during the rise of Western centralized power people (understandably) complained
about centralized power and homogeneity, just as today during the fall of Western
centralized power they are complaining about fragmentation and lack of common voice.
That doesn’t mean we’ve come full circle, exactly. As per the helical theory of history,
we might have progressed or regressed. But there may be an underlying cycle: “the
empire, long divided, must unite; long united, must divide.”

Anyway, this model would explain why we’re seeing an inversion: there was an upward
arc that favored the centralized State, but now we’re in the middle of a downward arc
that favors the decentralized Network.67 So various historical events are recurring with
the opposite results, like the fluid flowing in reverse. And that’s the thesis on how our
Future is Our Past.


2.8 Left is the New Right is the New Left

Marx’s concept of a class struggle has been so influential that people don’t realize that
sometimes those revolutionary classes won, and became ruling classes. And then in
turn fought the subsequent revolutionary classes.

In fact, they often did.

Understanding this is important if you want to build a startup society. Unless you
are significantly differentiated from the establishment — unless you have a “10X value
proposition”, as a venture capitalist would put it —you’re not going to attract citizens.

Social differentiation means being revolutionary in some sense. Not necessarily in the
sense of the Paris Commune. But morally revolutionary in the sense of inverting some
premise that society at large thinks is good, yet that you can show — through your
meticulous study of history — is actually bad.68 That moral inversion is the moral
innovation that’s the basis for a startup society, and it leads us ineluctably to left-vs-
right.

   67In the West, at least. The East is a different matter! It’s a whole essay in its own right, but the
future may be a Centralized East and a Decentralized West.
   68A startup company can get away with mainly being technologically revolutionary, though there
is often the subtext of being morally revolutionary too, which is why “change the world!” is a big
motivation for many. Turning that subtext into text is crucial for a startup society, as opposed to
a mere startup company, as missionary societies tend to outperform mercenary ones. See the One
Commandment and the section on Parallel Societies.

103
102                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



2.8.1 Why Discuss Left and Right at All?

Wait. Can’t we just do technology without politics, or use technology to escape politics?
Unfortunately, no, because politics is about people who disagree with you. If you’re
working with computers, or robots, or pure math, you don’t have politics. If you’re
in a highly aligned society, you don’t have politics either. But to build such a highly
aligned society from scratch, you need to think about politics.

Put another way, if the startup founders of the 2000s and 2010s had to level up beyond
technology to learn business, the startup society founders of the 2020s need to add
history and politics to their curriculum. Because a theory of left and right is necessary
for nation formation.

Our theory begins by discussing the split between visions of moral and technological
progress, the analogy between political and financial arbitrage, the market for revolu-
tionaries of both the political activist and tech founder type, and the concept of startup
societies as a way to reunify moral and technological progress.

Next we discuss left and right as real constructs, using the spatial theory of voting to
obviate the objection that left and right don’t really exist, and qualifying our observa-
tion by noting these are point-in-time constructs.

Subsequently we discuss how left and right change over time, using examples from
what we call the left, right, and libertarian cycles, in the context of both State-oriented
political movements and more recent Network-centric tech startups.

Finally, we discuss several specific “flippenings” through history where winning teams
changed ideological orientation upon victory, and give a thesis on what the next flip-
pening will look like.


2.8.2 Reunifying Technological and Moral Progress

Before we get into left-vs-right, the concept of starting a new project with a moral
rather than technological innovation will be unfamiliar to many tech founders. So let’s
make it familiar.

First, we need to understand the surprising similarities between startup founders and
political activists, between those focused on technological innovation and those inter-
ested in moral good. The turn-of-the-century progressives thought of these as the same
thing: progress was both technological and moral progress. Public sanitation, for ex-
ample, was both a technological innovation and a moral good (“cleanliness was next to
godliness”).

More recently, technological and moral innovators have grown to be at odds, because
the US establishment now regards its economic disruptors as enemies.69 As we’ll get
to, the idea of funding presidents of startup societies around the world could reunify
technological and moral progress. But what exactly do we mean by “moral progress”?

  69See Tech vs Media, aka PC vs PC.

104
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            103



Moral Progress is Moral Innovation is Moral Inversion

If you want to produce moral and not just technological progress, you’re going to
have to introduce new moral premises that invert what people previously believed. So
one man’s moral innovation is another man’s moral inversion. Here are some specific
examples:

      smoking was acceptable, is now considered “bad”

      alcohol was “bad” during Prohibition, is now acceptable

      profit was “bad” under Communism, is now acceptable

      college was once considered merely acceptable, but in the postwar era became
        “good”

Some observations immediately come to mind.

    1. First, from this list, you should be able to generate many more examples (we
        avoided the very obvious ones). And you might realize that a significant fraction
        of today’s public conversation is devoted to debating whether X is morally good
        or bad, usually without stating it quite so bluntly.

    2. Second, a moral innovation need not flip something all the way from “good” to
        “bad”. Simply flipping it from “bad” to “acceptable” or “acceptable” to “bad” can
        be highly consequential.

    3. Third, we can see that moral progress is not as straightforward as technological
        progress. The moral step forward that Communism proposed - the premise that
        “profit was bad” - was actually a terrible innovation that led to tens of millions
        dead and a worse-off world. By contrast, the Enlightenment’s moral innovations
        were good, at least in the sense that they led to technological development.

    4. Fourth, that last point shows that benchmarking what “moral good” means is
        nontrivial. Does it mean deontologically good, or consequentially good? That
        is, is this moral principle good in some abstract sense, or is it good because it
        produces measurably good results?70

    5. Fifth, if a given society has its moral foundations generally right, then most of
        the proposed moral innovations or inversions will actually make people worse off
        if imposed on the populace at large.

All of this is true. Nevertheless, a key realization for a tech founder should be that a
significant fraction of people want moral progress. Just as much as the technologist
wants to get to Mars, a large chunk of society wants to feel like the good guys fighting
in some grand cause. And if you don’t give them that cause, they’ll make one up,
and/or start fighting each other. (Note that Mars is itself a moral cause when framed
in terms of “backing up humanity” or “exploring the final frontier”.)

  70Our argument is that a moral principle is consequentially good if it attracts people to your new
startup society, as per the One Commandment.

105
104                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Another realization is that consent can bound the scope of moral innovation. The
communist revolutions of the 20th century were evil not just because of their murderous
results, but because they ran a giant human experiment on people against their will.
Those who wanted to opt out, to exit, were stopped by Berlin Walls and Iron Curtains.
But the forgotten American “communistic societies” of the 1800s were generally good,
because only those who wanted to be there remained. Anyone who didn’t like it could
leave. That’s why the reopening of the frontier is so important: it gives space to morally
innovate without affecting those who don’t consent to the experiment.

A third realization is that technological innovation drives moral innovation. While
human nature may be roughly constant, technology is not. So new tech causes the
introduction of new moral principles, or the re-evaluation of old ones. Consider the
premise that “freedom of speech is good”: that means one thing in 1776, another
thing during the era of highly centralized mass media, and yet another in an era when
everything reduces to speech-like digital symbols transmitted over the internet.

A related realization is that moral innovation drives technological innovation. Once it
was no longer considered morally “evil” to propose a heliocentric model, people could
develop more accurate star charts, which in the fullness of time got us to oceanic
navigation, satellites, and space travel. Conversely, if you introduce the moral premise
that “digital centralization is bad”, you move down the branch of the tech tree that
begins with Bitcoin.

A final realization is that just like most attempts at technological innovation fail, most
attempts at moral innovation will also fail. However, if those failures occur within the
bounded confines of a consensual startup society, they’re more acceptable as the price of
moral progress. And if you think society has in many ways now generally become bad,
it may not that be that hard to find ways to improve on it through a moral inversion.


Political Arbitrage and Financial Arbitrage

A moral inversion is a form of political arbitrage. Nietzsche criticized it when Chris-
tianity did it, but also had to admit it worked.71 Why did it work? One view is that
“aict the comfortable and comfort the aicted” is essentially the same concept as
buy low/sell high. You’re supporting something when it’s low and shorting it when it’s
high.

The mood of the words is very different, of course. The political arbitrage of supporting
those with low status and attacking those with high status is typically framed as a
moral imperative, while the financial arbitrage of buying assets with low value and

   71Nietzsche prized heroism rather than victimology, and didn’t like how the inversion of values
brought Rome low. But he also had to respect a winner, and somehow the victimologists did win.
A vantage point that unites these conflicting observations is that winners tend to be content, while
losers can be highly motivated. But not all winners remain content forever; sometimes there are
defectors, who become counter-elites, and side with the “losers”. The counter-elites and “losers” then
form, respectively, the leadership and base of a revolutionary movement that attacks the winners to
establish a new ruling class — if successful.

106
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            105


selling assets of high value is usually portrayed as a dispassionate mechanism for gaining
financial capital. But recall that people do sometimes make moral arguments for buying
low and selling high (“it helps markets become more efficient”). So you might invert
the mood of the words on the other side too, and think of “aicting the comfortable
and comforting the aicted” as a dispassionate mechanism for gaining political capital.

There’s a related observation: the concept of “buy low, sell high” assumes there are
many different assets to choose from, many axes to arbitrage. By contrast, the concept
of “aict the comfortable and comfort the aicted” tacitly assumes only one axis of
powerful-vs-weak. However, multiple axes of power exist. For example, a man who
organizes a million dollars for charity may be economically comfortable, yet can be
socially weak relative to the establishment journalist who decides to aict him for
his tweets. So the ability to designate just who exactly is “comfortable” and who is
“aicted” is itself a form of power. Someone who can pick who to label as “comfortable”,
who can pick the axis of political arbitrage, can keep knocking down the “comfortable”
while themselves remaining very comfortable. And that means the concept of “aicting
the comfortable and comforting the aicted” can also be a mechanism for maintaining
political capital.

Putting these ideas together, once you start reclassifying much of the moral language
flying through the air as a kind of political arbitrage, you can start thinking about it
more rationally. Political arbitrage involves backing a faction that is politically weaker
today than it could or should be. An early backer that risks their own political capital
to make a faction more justly powerful can also gain a slice of that power should it
actually materialize.

Think about the status that accrued to the Founding Fathers, to the early Bolshe-
viks, to Mao’s victorious communists, to the civil rights activists, or to the Eastern
European dissidents after the Soviets fell. These very different groups of social revolu-
tionaries all took significant status risks — and gained significant status rewards come
the revolution.


The Market for Revolutionaries

Once we see the mapping between financial and political arbitrage, we realize there is
a market for revolutionaries.

Today, there are two kinds of revolutionaries: technological and political. And there are
two kinds of backers of these revolutionaries: venture capitalists and philanthropists.
The backers seek out the founders, the ambitious leaders of new technology companies
and new political movements. And that is the market for revolutionaries.

Equipped with this framework, you can map the tech ecosystem to the political ecosys-
tem. You can analogize tech founders to political activists, venture capitalists to polit-
ical philanthropists, tech trends to social movements, YC Startup School to the Oslo
Freedom Forum, the High Growth Handbook to Beautiful Trouble, startups to NGOs,
big companies to government agencies, Crunchbase to CharityNavigator, and so on.

107
106                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Just as there is an entire ecosystem to source and back tech founders, there is an entire
ecosystem to do so for political activists. It’s less explicit in key respects, of course.
There aren’t term sheets between political philanthropists and their young proteges,
there aren’t “exits” to the tune of billions of dollars, and we don’t usually see political
activists bragging about their funding in the same way that tech founders talk up
their investors. Indeed, often the funding trail is intentionally obscured, to frustrate
opposition research.

But the process of going from a revolutionary’s bright idea to a small group with a bit
of funding to a mass movement is similar to the journey of a tech startup. And the
endgame can be even more ambitious; if the top tech founders end up running compa-
nies like Google and Facebook, the top political activists end up running countries like
Myanmar and Hungary.72 It’s “going public” in a different way.

Take another look at the careers of political activists as varied as Aung San Suu Kyi,
Viktor Orban, Vaclav Havel, Hamid Karzai, Ahmad Chalabi, Joshua Wong, Liu Xi-
aobo, and the like. All of them fit this model. Western resources backed them to
come to power and build pro-Western governments in their region. That doesn’t mean
these political founders always won (Wong and Xiaobo very much did not) or executed
well (Karzai and Chalabi did not), or even stayed West-aligned indefinitely (Suu Kyi
and Orban did not). But if you track each of their careers back, you’ll see something
like this episode, when Soros was funding Orban and both were on the same side as
revolutionary forces against the Soviets. At that point in time, Soros was the philan-
thropist and Orban his protege, much as a venture capitalist might back an ambitious
young founder. That’s a classic example of how backers seek leaders in the market for
revolutionaries.


Startup Societies Reunify Technological and Moral Progress

You might find it surprising, or disquieting, to think about all these different political
revolutions as being similar to VC-backed startups. But revolutions are difficult to
bootstrap, so there’s often a great power sponsor. The French were crucial to the
American Revolution, for example.

What’s the relevance for us? Well, the startup society reunifies the concepts of techno-
logical and political revolution, pulls together the two different kinds of progress, and
presents a new path to power. Because now both the tech founder and the political
activist can declare themselves presidents of a startup society.

Backers can fund startup societies using the mechanisms of tech, out in the open, with

   72There are of course tiers of victory below the “running a country” level. For example, most
political founders would consider it a huge win to get government funding in perpetuity for their
activist organization. That means their original philanthropist no longer has to bankroll it, and future
funding comes off the public’s books. It’s similar to a VC who has risked capital on a small startup,
and then seen it go public. Now they don’t have to shoulder all the risk, and can in fact begin reaping
some of the reward. The difference is that when a political activist’s group goes “public” it is merging
with the State, while when a tech company goes “public” it is merging with the Network of investors.

108
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            107


explicit contracts, and consent by all citizens. But they can also achieve the moral
innovation desired by the political revolutionaries. And if these startup societies are
built out on the frontier, whether digital or physical, then the moral innovations are
no longer imposed top-down, but adopted bottom-up by the people who opt in. That
gives a better way to achieve the goals of ambitious young political reformers.

In short, once we see that a tech founder builds a startup company to effect economic
change, and a political activist builds a social movement to effect moral change, we can
see how the startup societies we describe in this work combine aspects of both.


2.8.3 Two Ideologies

The Spatial Theory of Voting

Now we turn to left and right.

The simplest approach is to talk about the left and right as if they are permanent
categories; you’ll hear this when people talk about “the left” and “the right” as groups.

The second order approach is to contest this binary. People will (correctly!) note
that realignments happen, that the left/right dichotomization doesn’t fully encode73
political behavior, that the masses aren’t as ideologically consistent as the elites, that
the categories vary over time, and so on.

The third order approach is to acknowledge this complexity but invoke the spatial
theory of voting, which allows us to quantify matters. As reviewed in this PDF, the
spatial theory of voting allows us to analyze everything from Congressional votes to
Supreme Court decisions to newspaper editorials. When we do so, the first principal
component of political variation does indeed correspond to the left/right spectrum.

The fourth order approach is to then note that this (real!) axis actually rotates over
time. It’s more about relative tribal positioning (voting with members of the same
political tribe) than absolute ideological positioning (voting for a constant ideological
position). Revolutionary tactics eventually succeed in gaining power for one tribe, and
ruling class tactics eventually fail to defend power for another tribe, so the “left” and
“right” gradually switch over historical timescales even as the tribal names remain the
same.


Fights Create Factions

Two factions consistently arise because coalition-forming behavior is game-theoretically
optimal. That is, when fighting over any scarce resource, if one group teams up and
the other doesn’t, the first group tends to win.

This is a fundamental reason why humans tend to consolidate into two factions that
fight each other over scarce resources till one wins. The winning team enjoys a brief

  73Best example: the surveillance votes are splitting Republicans and Democrats on the basis of
Network vs State. The “libertarian” moment happened but not within the State, within the Network.

109
108                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



honeymoon, after which it usually then breaks up internally into left and right factions
again, and the battle begins anew. After the French Revolution, factions famously
arose. After World War 2, the once-allied US and USSR went to Cold War. And
after the end of the Cold War, the victorious US faction broke down into internal
hyperpolarization. A strong leader might keep this from happening for a while, but the
breakdown of a victorious side into left and right factions is almost a law of societal
physics.



Left and Right as Temporary Tactics, Not Constant Classes

The names for the two tactics that arise in these battles may hail from the French
Revolution74 — the left and the right — but they’re almost like magnetic north and
south, like yin and yang, seemingly encoded into our nature.

The left tactic is to delegitimize the existing order, argue it is unjust, and angle for
redistributing the scarce resource (power, money, status, land), while the right tactic
is to argue that the current order is fair, that the left is causing chaos, and that the
ensuing conflict will destroy the scarce resource and not simply redistribute it.

You can think of circumstances where the right was correct, and those where the left
was. A key concept is that on a historical timescale, right and left are temporary tac-
tics as opposed to defining characteristics of tribes. For example, Protestants originally
used left tactics relative to the Catholic Church in the time of Martin Luther. Then,
hundreds of years later, the American descendants of those revolutionaries - the Protes-
tant establishment, the WASPs – used right tactics to defend its position as the ruling
class. As we discuss, many such flippenings occur in history, where a given tribe uses
leftist tactics in one historical period and its cultural descendants use rightist tactics
in another.

What’s the guideline for when a tribe will use left or right tactics? The tribe that’s
defending (the ruling class) uses right tactics, and the tribe that’s attacking (the rev-
olutionary class) uses left tactics. Because institutional defenders tend to win, each
individual member of a revolutionary class feels like they’re losing. But because insti-
tutional defenders have to constantly fight swarms of revolutionaries to hold onto their
position, the ruling class also feels like it’s on the back foot.

While there are big victories where the tribe using right or left tactics manages to
sweep the field of their enemies for a brief interval, a new tribe usually arises that is
to their respective left or right, and the battle begins anew. Can we ever escape this
cycle of conflict over scarce resources?


   74The concepts predate the French Revolution, though, even if that’s when those terms were first
used. Left and right go back at least to Christians vs Romans, and probably to the dawn of human
civilization.

110
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            109



Frontiers Mitigate Factions

The key word there is scarce. Everything changes when the frontier opens up, when
there is a new realm of unoccupied space, where resources are suddenly less scarce.
There’s less obligate wrangling, because an aggrieved faction can choose fight or flight,
voice or exit. The would-be revolutionary doesn’t necessarily have to use left tactics to
overthrow the ruling class anymore, resulting in a right crackdown in response. They
can instead leave for the frontier if they don’t like the current order, to show that their
way is better, or alternatively fail as many startups do.

The frontier means the revolutionary is simultaneously less practically obstructed in
their path to reform (because the ruling class can’t stop them from leaving for the
frontier and taking unhappy citizens with them), but also more ethically constrained
(because the revolutionary can’t simply impose their desired reforms by fiat, and must
instead gain express consent by having people opt into their jurisdiction).

These are, however, reasonable tradeoffs. So while the frontier is not a panacea, it is at
least a pressure valve. That’s why reopening the frontier may be the most important
meta-political thing we can do to reduce political conflict.


Two Ghosts, Different Hosts

We’ve talked about the left and right as tactics. You can also think of them as two
ghosts, with different hosts. In any population, at any given time, one subpopulation
will be hosting the leftist ghost and the other will be animated by the rightist ghost.

Left and right in this sense are almost like spirits that flit from host to host, occupying
the minds of millions of people at the same time, coordinating groups against each
other. And as you start looking at the history of religions or political movements, you
can start to see that each has a “left mode” for revolutionary offense and a “right mode”
for ruling class defense.

Why then do people often discuss left and right as if they were permanent classes rather
than temporary tactics?

One answer comes from an analogy to tech startups. Just like a startup wants to
maintain the pretense of being “revolutionary” for as long as possible, and a big company
wants to maintain the pretense of being “dominant” for as long as possible, so too does
it take a while for a revolutionary leftist to admit that they’ve becoming ruling class, or
for a self-conceptualized member of the ruling class to admit they’ve actually become
dispossessed. Paradoxically, both such admissions are demoralizing. Obviously, for the
former member of the ruling class to concede that they’ve completely lost is a blow to
morale. But for the former revolutionary to recognize they’ve won likewise takes the
sails out of their movement, the moral justification for their revolution.

Another reason is that the switching tends to happen gradually, over historical
timescales. So it’s not unreasonable to talk about “the left” or “the right” in a given
period. Today, though, we’re in a realigning time where the switching is more visible.

111
110                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



My Left is Your Right

Note that we take no position on whether left or right strategies are objectively “good.”
In our model, these are just tactics used by warring tribes, by two different social
networks going at it. The revolutionary tribe uses left tactics and the ruling tribe uses
right tactics. But if the tribe using leftist tactics starts winning, it starts using rightist
tactics to defend its wins, and vice versa.

As an analogy, take a look at this GIF of two magnets. They repel each other into
mirror positions. Think of this as an analogy for left and right: my left is your right.
Whatever you adopt, I’ll have to adopt the mirror tactic.

Americans saw this in fast-forward during COVID. First the Republicans were con-
cerned about the virus, and the Democrats were calling people racists for paying atten-
tion to it. Then once Trump started saying the virus wasn’t serious, positions flipped,
with the Democrats calling for (and implementing) lockdowns and the Republicans
fighting them on libertarian grounds. Then Trump flipped again to supporting vac-
cines, while Biden, Harris, and other Democrats said they wouldn’t trust a rushed
Trump vaccine. Then the vaccine came out (the same one developed under the Trump
Administration’s Operation Warp Speed!) and many Democrats were suddenly all in
favor of mandating that which they once wanted to avoid, while many Republicans
now booed this as an intolerable infringement on liberty.

You can rationalize these twists and turns. Those who do so commonly invoke Keynes:
“When the facts change, I change my mind — what do you do, sir?” You might say that
the US was first too apathetic towards COVID-19, and then it overreacted. Committed
partisans can no doubt give logical explanations for the observed sequence of events.

But forget about these details for a second and focus on the flip-flops. Whatever
position one group adopted, the other did the opposite. The parsimonious explanation
is that it was just magnets repelling, factions fighting. Professed ideals were just a mask
for tribal interest. This fits the model of left and right swapping over time, because
we’re now seeing those swaps happen in real-time. In such a period, the conflict is
more obviously tribal (“Democrat-vs-Republican”) than ideological (“left-vs-right”).

Putting it all together, we propose that (a) left and right are quantifiable phenomena
we can see via the spatial theory of voting, (b) the left/right axis is real but rotates
with time, (c) they’re ancient and ineradicable concepts, arguably on par with yin/yang
or magnetic north/south, (d) they’re complementary tactics to gain access to scarce
resources, (e) if one group uses a left tactic, the other is almost forced to adopt a
right tactic in response, and vice versa, (f) the frontier reduces political left/right
issues because it reduces conflict over scarce resources, (g) we can think of left as
revolutionary tactics and right as ruling class tactics and (h) the tactics constantly
swap hosts over historical timeframes.

Let’s now drill into that last point, perhaps the least obvious: namely the concept that
left and right change hosts over historical timeframes. Our study begins by introducing
the left, right, and libertarian cycles.

112
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            111



2.8.4 Three Cycles

The Left Cycle

The left cycle is the story of how the revolutionary class becomes the ruling class.

Think about the following concepts: Christian King, Protestant Establishment, Repub-
lican Conservative, Soviet Nationalist, CCP Entrepreneur, or Woke Capitalist. Each
of these compound nouns has within it a fusion of a once-left-associated concept and a
right-associated one.

That prefix is important: once-left-associated. At one point, Christians led a revo-
lutionary movement against the Roman Empire, Protestants led a decentralist move-
ment against the Catholic Church, Republicans led an abolitionist movement against
the South, the Soviets led an internationalist movement against the nationalist White
Russians, the CCP led a communist movement against the capitalists, and the Wokes
led a critical movement against American institutions.

But then they gained power, and with power came new habits. The revolutionary
left that justified the rise to power morphed partially into an institutional right that
justified the use of power. By its nature, a revolutionary group adopts leftist tactics
to gain power, but once it wins, finds it needs to use rightist tactics to maintain power
against a new crop of leftist insurgents. Lenin promised land, peace, and bread — then
Trotsky quickly organized the Red Army. Thus does the leftist revolutionary rebuild a
rightist hierarchy.


















If you told this in story form, a manifesto-motivated group of revolutionaries would
fight the man and gain power, only to have some Stalin character compromise the
revolution, capture it, and just become the man all over again. Then you’d need a new
manifesto and revolution against that order. The excellent short film Dinner for Few
captures much of this dynamic.75

  75If you watch Dinner for Few, an interesting point is that it implicitly reverses our helical theory

113
112                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



If we take the 1000-year view, this is the long cycle that starts with Christian revolu-
tionaries tearing down the Western Roman Empire by 476 AD, gives eventual rise to
the ruling Catholic Church and Holy Roman Empire, and then (1000+ years later!)
sees Martin Luther nail his Ninety-five Theses to the Church of Wittenberg in 1517
AD as a new manifesto that spawns a whole new crop of Protestant revolutionaries.


Is there any alternative to this cycle, to a ruling class gaining power at the end of the
revolution? Well, if a revolution doesn’t result in some kind of order, it looks more
like a Pol Pot or Seven Kill Stele scenario, where the “revolution” is kept up through
endless killing. Something like that may be how past civilizations collapsed.


Thus, some kind of order after the revolution is preferable. That brings us back to the
left/right titrations: Christian King, Protestant Establishment, Republican Conserva-
tive, Soviet Nationalist, CCP Entrepreneur, Woke Capital. Each of them justifies the
new ruling class, the new order, with the language of the revolutionary class.


Note also that not every one of these titrations has exactly equal fractions of revolution
and institution. But the model happens repeatedly through history. A successful
revolutionary class becomes the institutional class, then a realignment happens, and
the new institutional class encounters a new revolutionary class.76





The Right Cycle

The right cycle is the story of this epistle: strong men create good times, good times
create weak men, weak men create hard times, and hard times create strong men.
Here’s the visual:



of history, as the ending of the short film implies that every new turn of the left cycle leaves less
resources for the next one. This is the Malthusian/Ehrlichian view of a finite pool of resources that
gets spent down by humanity.
   Now, there are actually some cases where this is true. The Soviet communists inflicted widespread
environmental damage, including visibly draining the Aral Sea, leaving less for those that came after.
And the Cambodian communists murdered anyone with glasses, likely inhibiting any future Renais-
sance. But those were both communist regimes, rather than capitalist ones, so where we may diverge
from the talented filmmaker (Nassos Vakalis) is on the type of society that moves humanity forward
– and whether progress is even possible.
   After all, at one point all humans (or their hominid ancestors) were in the state of nature, lacked
clothes and abodes. Then various technologies were invented that started creating wealth and sep-
arating man from ape. If we agree that a medieval peasant was in a sense richer than a paleolithic
caveman, we are acknowledging that long-run progress is feasible. This contradicts the idea that every
new turn of the cycle necessarily leaves us worse off.
   76We are in the middle of that realignment, both within the US and outside it.

114
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            113




















This cycle starts from the right and becomes left. If we turned this into a story, it’d start
with the rise of a small group of highly aligned Spartans. They grow on the borders
of empire, so-called “marcher lords” with a strong sense of ingroup spirit, what Ibn
Khaldun would call asabiyyah. Then they radiate out and start conquering the world.
Their indomitable will carves a swath through the degenerate empire that surrounds
them. They eventually achieve total victory. Strong men create good times.

But as they scale, they can no longer do everything on trust and need to start imple-
menting processes and taxes. They also start attracting lazy parasites to the wealth
they’ve created, people who want to join something great rather than build something
great. And they have within their walls many of the people they just conquered, who
don’t share their values and indeed didn’t much like being conquered. No one wants to
work as hard or be as ruthless as that early Spartan band, given the easy wealth now
available, so they enjoy themselves and busy themselves by fighting with each other
over trifles. So good times create weak men.

Eventually this bureaucratic, disaligned, decadent empire falls to a new band of Spar-
tans from the outside. And thus do weak men create hard times, and in turn fall to
strong men.


The Libertarian Cycle

The libertarian cycle is the story of how a libertarian founder rebuilds the state.

First, a libertarian(ish) founder leaves the stifling bureaucracy of a big company to start
their own. Most immediately fail, but through pure maneuver warfare and relentless
execution, that founder might be able to make enough money to hire someone. In the
early days the most important quantity is the burn rate. Every single person must be
indispensable.

Eventually, if successful, the company starts building up some structure. Conserva-
tivism takes over. With the business growing consistently, the founder adds structure,

115
114                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


career tracks, and a stable hierarchy. Now the most important quantity becomes the
bus number, the number of people who can get hit by a bus such that the company is
still functional. Suddenly every single person must now be dispensable.


















This is like the transition from unicellularity to multicellularity. The founder has to
invest in a bureaucracy that impersonalizes the company and turns every employee into
an interchangeable part. Otherwise, one person could quit and crash the company.

Around this time, the parasites start entering. They don’t want the risk of a small
or even mezzanine-size business. They want lots of perks, high salaries, low workload,
and the minimum work for the maximum return. They aren’t truly equity-aligned;
the company is just a job that pays the rent. The interchangeability actually attracts
them! They know they don’t need to pull their weight, that they aren’t that accountable
individually for the business’ success or failure. The system will support them. This
behavior is rational for them, but it degenerates into entitlement, and eventually causes
collapse of the company’s business model, though this may take a very long time.

Finally, some stifled employee decides to exit the stultifying bureaucracy and become a
libertarian(ish) founder, and the cycle starts anew. As per the helical theory of history,
all progress is on the z-axis: they build the company, scale a bureaucracy to assist with
that, see it take over, and incentivize the best to exit. Thus does the libertarian founder
rebuild the state.


The Unified Cycle

We can synthesize these into a unified theory of cycles.

      The left cycle starts with a group of revolutionary leftists that then become
        institutional rightists.

      The right cycle starts with a group of determined rightists that then become
        decadent leftists.

116
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                                        115



      The libertarian cycle starts with a group of ideological libertarians that end up
         building a bureaucratic state.

If you put them together, you get revolutionary, determined, ideologues (a left/right/libertarian
fusion) whose glorious victory ends in institutional, bureaucratic, decadence (a different
kind of left/right/libertarian fusion!)

Most people haven’t studied enough history to have an intuition for cyclicity on a
100-year or longer timescale. But many people are familiar with the lifecycle of suc-
cessful tech startups, which exhibit this behavior on a 10-year timescale. That’s about
the longest kind of experiment we can run repeatedly within a human lifetime. And
fortunately the results have been widely witnessed.

That is, within our lives, we’ve seen many examples of a startup disrupting an in-
cumbent77 through scrappy tactics, becoming the incumbent themselves, and then
employing incumbent tactics to defend itself against a new wave of startups coming up
against it.

We’ve also seen firsthand that a successful tech startup is typically a left/right fusion. It
has the leftist aspects of missionary zeal, critique of the existing order, desire to change
things, informal dress and style, initially flat org chart, and revolutionary ambition.
But it also has the rightist aspects of hierarchy, leadership, capitalism, accountability,
and contractual order. If you only have one without the other, you can’t really build a
meaningful company. Right without left is at best Dunder Miin Paper Company78;
left without right is an idealistic co-op that never ships a product.

Finally, we’ve also seen that just like most revolutions, most startups do fail. Failed
startups don’t capture enough of the market for dollars, while the failed revolutions
don’t capture enough of the political market for followers. But those startups that do
succeed then need to fight off both startups and even bigger companies, until and unless
they become a global goliath themselves (which is rare!).

The unified theory is thus a centralization, decentralization, and recentralization cycle.
The revolutionary, determined, ideologues break away from the establishment, and then
- if they succeed - build a giant centralized empire, which subsequently degenerates and
spawns the next set of revolutionary, determined, ideologues.

   77Usually with the help of what Peter Turchin calls counter-elites, high-ranking members of society
that are disaligned with the incumbent elites. In a startup’s case the counter-elites would be venture
capitalists looking to fund disruption of a big company. In a revolutionary political movement’s case,
they’d be disaffected nobles looking for a demographic to champion.
   78Even this is unfair to the fictional Dunder Miin Paper Company. Someone, probably the Dunders
and Miins, must have had a lot of passion for paper at some point in time. You could imagine a
time back when the interoffice memo system was basically the corporate intranet, that paper was to
every business what internet connectivity is today. Anyway, someone must have found it exciting at
some point. Because it’s just too hard to start a company as a pure dollars and cents endeavor. John
Collison has similarly observed that almost everything you see — this chair, that fountain — was
someone’s passion project, given how hard it is to ship something competitive.

117
116                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



New Boss: Not Exactly The Same As The Old Boss

The concept we’ve described here isn’t Marxism79, which doesn’t have the concept of
groups shifting sides from left to right and vice versa. The Marxist tacitly stipulates
only one transition, where the “poor” beat the “rich” and usher in the inevitable age
of communism, and that’s it. There isn’t cyclicity in their theory of history. It’s a
one-way ascent to utopia.

The unified cycle theory is more similar to the plot of Animal Farm, where the “new
boss is just like the old boss,” Nietzsche’s concept of master religions, the Lessons
of History excerpt on systole/diastole, or Scott Alexander’s finite automata model.80
These each tell a story of cyclicity; Orwell’s book is focused on elite cyclicity (“new
boss same as the old boss”), Durant’s chapter treats economic cyclicity, and Alexander’s
post discusses cultural cyclicity.




















But the unified cycle theory is not about a perfect circle at all — the new boss may

   79Marxism postulates that the “poor” were always oppressed by the “rich”, even if these groups
actually shift dramatically over time. But a simple calculation shows that it’s actually quite hard to
maintain wealth across generations. Assume that a man has 2 children, and 4 grandchildren, and 8
great-grandchildren, and so on. Then even a very rich man would be splitting his fortune over 2N
descendants by generation N. Assuming about 30 years between generations, few civilizations have
enough long-term stability to allow the consistent doubling of a fortune every 30-odd years, especially
if we take into account the annual debiting of living expenses. And this calculation assumes only two
children in each generation, where it could be more. If primogeniture were applied, rather than equal
distribution over all descendants, the eldest son would receive the whole fortune, but the other 2N-1
would be out of luck. So, it’s actually quite hard for a rich man’s descendants to remain “rich.” When
you apply this concept not just to a single individual but the entire class of “rich” people, it vitiates an
implicit mental model of Marxism: namely that there has been a static class of “rich” people lording
it over the “poor” for generations.
   80Scott positions the switch from left to right as purely a matter of style, and there is some truth
to that. But I think there is also substance — leftist tactics are for tearing down orders, and rightist
tactics for defending them. So what he’s observing is more like VCs and founders leaving a successful
startup to then found/fund the competitor to that startup.

118
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                                        117



be much better or worse than the old boss, may not be exactly the same. It’s closest
to the helical theory of history, because we don’t necessarily come back to the same
place on the z-axis. Many of these revolutions may actually leave everyone worse off,
representing setbacks on the z-axis, just like many startups fail. There is however the
occasional crucial revolution — usually frontier-opening in some sense — that pushes
humanity forward on the z-axis and improves the world for the better.


Holy War Wins Wars

One way of thinking about the unified cycle theory is to fuse our theory of left as
revolutionary class tactics and right as ruling class tactics. A leader needs aspects of
both to win. The left gives the holy justification to fight the war, the right gives the
might to win the fight, and together they allow that leader to prosecute a holy war.
To take two examples:

      Mao was a communist, but he was also absolutely a “strong man” created by “hard
         times.” He had that rightist ruthlessness about him, and unlike the stereotypical
         vegan pacifist of the libertarian left, his men were willing to impose capital pun-
         ishment for any crime, real or imagined. Without some of that conventionally
         right-coded physical might he wouldn’t have won against a Nationalist opposition
         that was willing to use military force.81

      Conversely, if you think of the Poles and Estonians revolting against the Soviet
         Union in the 1980s, they weren’t only making conventionally right-wing argu-
         ments for capitalism and nationalism and traditional religion, they were also
         making left-wing arguments for democracy and free speech. Without some of
         that conventionally left-coded humanism they wouldn’t have won against a So-
         viet Union which claimed greater holiness.

The point is that in any holy war, the left is the word, and the right is the sword. It’s
the priest and the warrior; you need both.

The left programs the minds. The priests and journalists, the academia and media,
they imbue the warriors with a sense of righteous purpose. They also justify the conflict
to the many bystanders, convincing them to either not get involved — or to get involved
on the warriors’ side. In this concept of left, the priests transmit a revolutionary zeal
that justifies the war against the opposing order, blesses it, consecrates it, says it is
necessary and virtuous, motivates the warriors, boosts their morale, and turns them
into missionaries that can defeat any mercenary.

The right furnishes the resources. They bring the warriors themselves, the farmers and
the miners, the engineers and the locomotives, the rugged physicality, the requisite
hierarchy, the necessary frugality, the profit and the loss, the determination and the
organization, the hard truths to keep a movement going that complement the moral

   81Please note that I think Chiang Kai-Shek was far preferable to Mao in the Chinese Civil War,
because the people of Taiwan were far better off than those in the PRC under Mao during the 1949-
1978 period.

119
118                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


premises that get a movement started, the point of the spear that prosecutes that holy
war.

Why do you need both right and left to win? Unless it’s a robot war (and we’ll
get to that later) you need high-morale fighters, so you obviously need the rightist
component as we’ve defined it. But the less obvious part is that you can’t win without
the leftist component either, because mercenaries will run out of morale well before
zealous missionaries.

Just to linger on this, the right often underestimates anything that’s non-physical.82 If
that describes you, don’t think of what the left does as just words, as woke slogans or
religious mumbo-jumbo. Think of what they’re doing as writing the social operating
system, the software for society, the code that coordinates huge numbers of human
beings towards a common goal by telling them what is good and bad, permissible and
impermissible, laudable and execrable. All logical deduction or martial action is then
downstream of these moral premises.

To summarize: you really do need both the word and the sword to win a war, both
the left and the right. And that concept applies outside the context of literal war, to
a variety of large-scale political movements, because (to invert Clausewitz) politics is
war by other means.

Again, this doesn’t mean that every movement has a precise 50%/50% titration of left-
and right-wing concepts, nor that there is some globally optimum combination of X%
left and Y% right that works across all time periods and societies, nor that the “center”
always wins. The main point is that a moribund left or right movement can often be
energized by infusing ideas from the other side.

A group using right tactics often has a deficit of zealous meaning, and is hanging onto
a ruling class position while forgetting why they need to justify it from scratch to
skeptical onlookers. Conversely, a group using left tactics often has a lack of hard-
nosed practicality, attacking the ruling class without a concrete plan for what to put
in its place come the revolution. Forming a left/right fusion that’s informed by these
concepts is quite different from what we typically think of as a left/right hybrid, namely
passive centrism.


2.8.5 Four Flippenings

As Saul Alinsky put it in Rules for Radicals: “The Prince was written by Machiavelli
for the Haves on how to hold power. Rules for Radicals is written for the Have-Nots on
how to take it away.” One could imagine a third installation in that fictional trilogy,
and it’d be about what happens when the Have-Nots win and become the Haves.

We call this a political flippening, after the term from cryptocurrency. A flippening is
when the #1 suddenly becomes the #2, and vice versa. It occurs when a revolutionary

  82The (revolutionary) left rarely underestimates the (ruling class) right, because guns, tanks, wealth
and other conventionally right-coded things are very tangible.

120
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            119


class flips a ruling class, only to become a new ruling class. The former ruling class
then gets pushed into oblivion. . . or becomes a new revolutionary class.

We’ll cover several flippenings in this section: the left/right inversion of the white
working class, the American and global flippenings of the last 100 years, a set of
historical flippenings that put these dynamics in broader context, and the ongoing
flippening between the ascending world and the descending class.


The Proletarian Flippening

The first flippening story is about the inversion of the working class. How did Stakhanov
become Archie Bunker? That is, how did the white working class flip from the core of
the left to the core of the right in one hundred years?

First: who’s Stakhanov, anyway? He’s the jacked Chad of socialist realism, the mythi-
cal Soviet worker who all the men wanted to be and all the women wanted to be with,
the one who supposedly shoveled the coal of ten men in one day, the comrade who was
a real bro, the guy in the “worker’s paradise” who somehow took no vacation time at
all. Here’s a pic of the (likely fictional) Aleksei Grigorevich Stakhanov, from the 1930s.

And who’s Archie Bunker? Well, he’s the bigoted patriarch of a once-popular 70s
show called All in the Family. Bunker’s role was to get dunked on in every episode by
“Meathead,” his enlightened, college-educated son-in-law. He’s a foil for the TV show’s
writers, representing all that is benighted and backward in the world. And here’s a pic
of the (definitely fictional) Archie Bunker, from 1971.

So: these are two very different portrayals of the white working class, just a few decades
apart! How did they flip? Why did they flip?

The Working Class as Revolutionary Rationale

In the first half of the 20th century, the person all enlightened people claimed to care
about was the working man. The working man! Upton Sinclair’s book was for him.
Orwell and the Popular Front fought alongside Stalinists in the Spanish Civil War
for him. All the buckets of blood shed by Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin — all of that was
ostensibly for him. Hitler too claimed to be for the working man, the Aryan one of
course; the full name of his faction was the National Socialist German Worker’s Party.
In hearing both the communists and fascists tell it, the working man was the most
honorable, humble, put-upon, long-suffering victim of a ruthless capitalist class. . . and
also the brave, muscular, tough backbone of the necessary revolution.

That’s the context in which the Stakhanov posters (and their Nazi equivalents) went
up everywhere.

Of course, in practice, communism was slavery, because the workers had to surrender
100% of their earnings to the state. As such, the Stakhanov posters were more cynical
than any capitalist breakroom infographic. The Soviet worker couldn’t protest, couldn’t
strike, couldn’t change jobs, couldn’t really buy anything with his “salary.” And those

121
120                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


were the lucky ones! The unlucky ones were forced by Trotsky to dig the White Sea-
Baltic Canal with their bare hands, or deported to Siberia by Stalin. As in Nazi
Germany, arbeit did not macht frei.

But, be that as it may, communism had traction. At its peak it covered “26% of the land
surface of the globe.” It was a secular ideology that commanded the zeal of a religious
movement — pure State-worship, in our terminology, the total replacement of G-o-d
with G-o-v. Decades after it had somewhat calmed down in the post-Stalinist USSR,
it was in full murderous swing in the PRC and Cambodia. The political formula which
put the working man on a pedestal as the put-upon victim of the powerful enabled one
man after another to gain power worldwide — Lenin, Trotsky, Stalin, Mao, Pol Pot,
Castro, Kim Il-Sung — and then enslave the working man in the name of liberating
him.


The Working Class as Revolutionary Obstacle

Then something interesting happened. The US managed to avoid communist revolution
(barely — see Henry Wallace and Venona), scrape through the tumultuous 60s, and
split enough of the proceeds with the union workers that they identified with America
rather than the “godless Russian commies.” The physical manifestation of this was
the Hard Hat Riot in 1970, when American union workers beat up the “dirty hippies”
cheering for North Vietnam.

Now, suddenly, the heretofore ignored negative qualities of the working man were
brought to the fore. He was white, first of all. And racist, sexist, and homophobic.
Ignorant, too. He needed to be educated by his betters. And thus All in the Family
with Archie Bunker began airing, depicting a very different kind of working man. Not
Stakhanov, not the uber-Chad of socialist realism, not the star of “boy meets tractor,”
but an obese layabout that represented everything wrong with society — and who was
now the oppressor.

And who was he oppressing? Well, the new proletariat: women, minorities, and LGBT.
Demographics that didn’t have that much political power when communism was roaring
to dominance in the early and mid 1900s, but which gradually grew to represent >50%
of the American electorate —apolitical prize waiting for anyone who figured out how
to tap into it. A political arbitrage opportunity, if you will, where the value of the
arbitrage was measured in power rather than money.

And this is how the white working class moved from oppressed to oppressor. But one
more event had to happen: the fall of the Soviet Union.


Communism Was Centralized Left

The women/nonwhites/LGBT group of “minorities” (which >90% of the global popu-
lation belongs to, if you stop to think about it) gradually became the core justification
for the New Left, just as the working class had been the justification for the Old Left.

122
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                                        121



But there was a transitional period.

For many years, the Western left still had a foot in both camps, with Soviet sympathiz-
ers coexisting with New Leftists.83 After all, the hippies punched by union workers had
been aligned with “Hanoi” Jane Fonda, and were pro-Communist or at least anti-anti-
Communist. They were “objectively pro-Soviet” using the terminology Orwell disliked.
Even as late as the mid 1980s, a lion of the Western left like Ted Kennedy offered to
do a deal with the USSR if they supported him for the US presidency.

The Soviet Union wouldn’t be around forever, though. For a variety of reasons, ranging
from the war in Afghanistan, the rejuvenation of American morale and defense spending
under Reagan, the freedom movements in Eastern Europe and the Baltics, and of course
the total failure of their own economy to produce consumer goods, the USSR was on
its last legs. Gorbachev inadvertently doomed the empire in his attempt to reform it,
by liberalizing speech along with economics at the same time. The double whammy
of glasnost and perestroika destabilized a once tightly controlled system. Gorbachev
did do a bit of cracking down (the raid on the Vilnius Tower comes to mind), but
fundamentally he wasn’t as ruthless as Stalin, and a critical mass of his people wanted
capitalist consumer goods anyway. So, after the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, and
an attempted restorative coup by “hardliners” in August 1991, the whole evil empire
collapsed by Christmas Day 1991.

At this point the Western left was at a crossroads. In China, 13 years earlier, Deng
Xiaoping had managed to outmaneuver Mao Zedong’s chosen successors, throw the
so-called Gang of Four in jail, and turn China towards the “capitalist road.” Now, the
other big communist champion, the Soviet Union, was going down for the count.

It appeared that the centralized left, the left with a designated and identifiable leader,
the centralized left of the USSR and PRC, of Stalin and Mao. . . that centralized left
would eventually lose its nerve and be beaten by the centralized right of the United
States.84

So, after 1991, there was no more centralized left, no more communism, aside from
holdouts like Cuba and North Korea that were of no global consequence. Instead it

   83We can’t really do the full complexity of the relationship between the Western left and the Soviets
justice in a few sentences, but see here. The short version is that prior to World War 2, Americans
were pivotal to the founding and operation of the Soviet Union, to a degree that has been completely
obscured today. Each thought of themselves as the senior partner in the relationship, as the one
who was using the other. After World War 2, there was a genuine title fight between the two for
world dominance during the Cold War, with residual Soviet sympathizers among the Americans and
US-sympathetic defectors within the Soviet Union. But even as late as the mid 1970s, after the defeat
in Vietnam, it was not obvious that the US would win the Cold War. Eventually the American
establishment started thinking of the Soviets as beneath them, and started calling the most dedicated
communists “conservative hardliners.” By 1991 the Soviets capitulated, not just because of internal
economic issues or external military pressure, but also due to losing much of the soft power support
from the Western left.
   84Using our terminology, within the context of the USSR, the Soviet government used rightist tactics,
as it was the ruling class. In a global context, however, the Soviet Union used leftist tactics, as it was
attempting to foment revolution.

123
122                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



became all about the decentralized left, the fusion of the civil rights movement and
Foucaltian deconstructionism, what we now call wokeness.


Wokeness is Decentralized Left

If you’ll note, the wokes don’t have a single leader like Stalin. They have no single book
like The Communist Manifesto. They don’t even like to be named. This is notable for
a movement that is otherwise so interested in verbal prestidigation, in renaming things!

Regardless of whether people call them “politically correct” or “SJWs” or “wokes” or
what have you, they’ll try to scratch off the label and say that they’re just being “good
people.” (You, of course, they have no problem calling you all kind of names.)

You can call them Democrats, and that’s in the ballpark, but many wokes are more
radical than Democratic party candidates (though still vote for them) and many rank-
and-file Democrats still aren’t wokes.

You can also note that the boundaries of wokeness are fluid. Anyone can just start
voicing woke rhetoric. You may even sympathize with some of their stated ideas (as
opposed to their actual practice). I do85, in fact, at least with the motte version - who’s
against equal treatment under the law? Of course, it never stops there.

You can notice that they do have their symbols and hashtags and flags (which, when
hoisted, indicate control of territory as any flag does) but that they often shy away
from admitting that what they’re doing is deeply political. It’s again just being a “good
person.” Then they return to writing policies and renaming streets.

They do have organizations, many NGOs and media outlets, of which Sulzberger’s
NYT is perhaps the most influential. But there’s no single directing group, and there’s
a very long tail of sympathizers.

Put it all together: no single leader, book, name, or organization. So if the communists
were centralized left, the wokes are decentralized left. If communists were like Catholics
folding into a single hierarchy, wokes are more like Protestants where anyone can set
up a shingle as a preacher.


Communism was State-first, Wokeness is Network-first

Just as an aside, there’s a subtlety if we apply the lens of the Leviathans. While
Communists were centralized, they were not entirely people of the State. The reason is
that they had both the Soviet state and the international Comintern network of spies
and revolutionaries. But they were primarily people of the State after 1917, as the
global movement was downstream of the Soviet government.86

   85Just as I sympathize with the working man, but know that the answer wasn’t socialism, commu-
nism, or fascism.
   86Until the Sino-Soviet split, which was notable because of how formal it was.

124
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            123


Wokes are the opposite. They are primarily people of the Network, as their habitat is
outside the elected State. The control circuitry for the US government resides outside
it, in media, academia, nonprofits, and the unfireable civil service.

But just as the communists don’t control all states (though they wanted to), the wokes
do not control all networks (though they want to). Their major weakness is that they
do not yet have total control over the English internet, the Chinese internet, or the
global crypto networks. But the wokes are trying manfully to gain such control. And
the switch from glorifying Stakhanov to denouncing Archie Bunker actually helps with
this, as social media users are much more helpful in gaining power over the Network
than factory workers.

Why? In the 20th century, the factory floor was the scene of the action and communism
was all about the strike. This was a collective action that seemed to help workers,
by redistributing wealth from the hated bosses. Over the medium term, of course,
adversarial unionization actually harmed workers because (a) they had to pay union
dues that gobbled up much of the pay raises, (b) they got a second set of managers in
the form of the union bosses, (c) their actions lead to a reduction in competitiveness of
their strike-ridden employer, and (d) in the event their country actually went communist
they lost the ability to strike completely. Nevertheless, union organizing helped the
communists gain influence over states. General strikes could bring entire countries to
a halt.

In the 21st century, the internet is the scene of the action and wokeness is all about the
cancellation. There’s no factory floor, no formal union leader, no centralized direction
from Moscow. Instead, anyone can decide at any time to use the rhetoric in the air to
lead a campaign against their “oppressor” in combination with others who subscribe to
one or more woke principles. It’s open source, it’s decentralized left.

Like the strike, the cancellation is a collective action that seems to help the “marginal-
ized”, by redistributing status from the hated oppressors to the cancellers. The likes,
retweets, and followers get redistributed in real-time. Over the medium term, however,
cancellation actually harms the “marginalized” because (a) everyone can now cancel
each other on some axis, making life highly unpleasant and (b) constant cancellation
leads to a low-trust society. Nevertheless, cancellation helps wokes gain control of net-
works. Social media swarms in the 2010s could bring tech executives to their knees,
just as general strikes in the 20th century could bring countries to a halt.



From Working Class to Wokest Class

So, that’s how Stakhanov became Archie Bunker. Once the US had integrated its
working class tightly enough to defuse its revolutionary potential, and centralized right
beat centralized left in the USSR and PRC, the left needed a new group it could use to
justify its revolution. It found it in the “marginalized” that it has now ridden to power

125
124                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



as Woke Capital.87 From the working class, to the wokest class.


The American Flippening

The second flippening is about the inversion of the Republican and Democrat parties
over the last 155 years. As context, most Americans know vaguely that the Republican
and Democrat parties “switched sides,” that Republicans were on the left in 1865 and
on the right by 1965, but not exactly how88 that happened.

How did the GOP move from the “Radical Republicans” of Lincoln’s time, to the conser-
vative Republicans of mid-century, to the proletarian truckers of the post-Trump party?
And how did Democrats go from secessionist Confederates to anti-anti-communist lib-
erals to woke capitalists?


The Short Version

The short version is that the Republicans gained moral authority after the Civil
War, used that to gain economic authority, then got critiqued by the (repositioned)
Democrats for being so rich, then lost moral authority, and consequently also lost eco-
nomic authority, bringing us to the present day. The Democrats were on the opposite
end of that cycle.


The 1865-2021 Cycle

Now the longer version.

Let’s warp back to 1865. Immediately after the Civil War, the Republicans had total
moral authority — and total command of the country. During the process of Recon-
struction and what followed, they turned that moral authority into economic authority,
and became rich by the late 1800s. After all, you wouldn’t want to have a Confederate-
sympathizing Democrat traitor as head of your railroad company, would you?

Gradually, the Democrats began repositioning89 from the party of the South to the
party of the poor. A major moment was William Jennings Bryan’s “Cross of Gold”
speech in 1896. Another huge move was FDR’s re-election in 1936, when black voters
shifted 50 points from Republican to Democrat, though they still voted Republican at

   87Note that wokeness does not actually benefit the “marginalized”. Communism promised liberation
for the workers only to push them into the slavery of the Gulag. Wokeness purports to benefit the
“marginalized” but is hard at work on fully immiserating them through inflation and destroying the
stability of their neighborhoods. We’re still in the relatively early stages, but the signs do not look
good.
   88Dinesh D’Souza would deny it happened at all! If you’re interested, here’s his case, and then also
Eric Foner’s.
   89Everything didn’t shift, of course. Over this period the Republicans remained a nationalist party.
But the Democrats flipped from being a secessionist party to an internationalist party. For example,
Woodrow Wilson was all about the League of Nations, and one of FDR’s first acts in office was
recognizing the Soviet Union.

126
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                                        125



the municipal level.90 The wrap up was in 1965 when black voters moved another 10-15
points towards Democrats, though the civil rights era was really just the culmination
of a multi-decadal trend.

After 1965 the Democrats had complete moral authority. And over the next 50 years,
from 1965-2015, the Democrats converted their moral authority into economic author-
ity. You wouldn’t want a Republican bigot as CEO of your tech company, would you?

Now that cycle has reached its zenith, and a critical mass of high income and status
positions in the US are held by Democrats. Some stats and graphs will show the story.
Democrats have:

      97% of journalists’ political donations

      98% of Twitter employees’ political donations

      >91% of professors in the top US universities

      26 out of 27 of the richest congressional districts

      >77% of political donations from Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Microsoft, Google

Meanwhile, the Republicans have by many measures become the party of the economic
and cultural proletariat. There are of course exceptions like the Supreme Court and
state legislatures which are majority Republican, but see this chart from the Brookings
Institute, which shows that >70% of US GDP is now in Democrat counties. See also
this set of graphs from 2019, and that’s before the money printing and small business
destruction that occurred during COVID. The dominance is even more total when one
thinks about cultural institutions.91 What’s the Republican Harvard — is it Bob Jones
University? What’s the Republican Hollywood — some guys on 4chan making memes?

So, Democrats have become the party of the ruling class, of the establishment. And
the Republicans are repositioning as the party of the proles, of the revolutionary class.
This is why you see Democrats doing things like:

      tearing up over the Capitol six months after tearing down George Washington

      denouncing free speech

      setting up disinformation offices

      shifting from investigating the government to “investigating” the citizenry

      scripting the recruiting ads for the CIA and military

      putting Pride flags on attack helicopters

   90See How Blacks Became Blue and page 30 of Farewell to the Party of Lincoln.
   91Note that the logic of disparate impact typically isn’t applied here; lack of representation of a
political class is not assumed to be due to discrimination. Yet note that Democrats only want to marry
other Democrats, and Republicans typically marry other Republicans. So over just a generation or so,
these political groups are fated to themselves become ethnic groups, much like what happened with
Sunnis and Shiites or Protestants and Catholics. The ideology influences the biology.

127
126                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


      advocating for corporations to fire people at will

      defending deplatforming as a private property right

      embracing the national security establishment

      allocating two billion dollars for the Capitol Police

      approving 40 billion dollars for war

It’s like the quote from Dune: “When I am weaker than you, I ask you for freedom
because that is according to your principles; when I am stronger than you, I take away
your freedom because that is according to my principles.” Now that the Democrats are
strong, they are acting like rightists. And now that the Republicans are weak, you see
them acting like leftists:

      criticizing America’s imperial influence in the world

      opposing war and military aid

      not trusting the FBI or the police

      expressing qualified sympathy for America’s current rivals

      talking positively about unions

      introducing anti-discrimination laws to protect Republicans

      lobbying for free speech

This explains the weird flip-flops of American politics over the last few years. We’re
in a realigning time where many institutional things are flipping from blue to red and
back before finally going bright blue or red. Free speech is now coded red, while the
FBI is now blue. Because Democrats are the ruling class now.

Note that this isn’t an endorsement of either side, just an observation that two ultra-
long-timeframe sine and cosine waves have now shifted into the opposite relative phase.
The parties that many identify with and implicitly think of as constant were not con-
stant. The radical Republicans attained socioeconomic power and their defense of this
order made them conservative; the reactionary Democrats lost socioeconomic power
and gradually repositioned as revolutionary. Now they’re flipping again.

This doesn’t mean everything is flipping, of course. Democrats are still pro-choice,
Republicans still pro-life. Republicans still have an institution or two, like the Supreme
Court and some states. Just as Democrats after the Civil War were very weak, but not
eradicated, and able to serve as spoilers.

However, the two parties have flipped on all the institutional bits, even if many Repub-
licans maintain the Monty-Python-like pretense that the conservative America of their
youth has just suffered a flesh wound, and many Democrats maintain the Soviet-like
pretense that the ruling class is still a revolutionary party. Mexico has a great name for

128
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                                        127



this kind of thing, the PRI or “institutional revolutionary party,” but there’s a more
familiar metaphor: the startup.

As noted earlier, a successful startup wants to think it’s still the scrappy underdog,
because that’s good for recruiting and morale. But now the Democrats are no longer a
startup. The party has completed a 155 year arc from the defeated faction in the Civil
War to America’s ruling class.

There’s a Ship of Theseus aspect to this, though. All the parts got swapped out, and
the parties switched sides, but somehow the triumphant Democrat coalition of 2021
ended up geographically and demographically similar to the Republican lineup of 1865:
Northeastern-centric liberals arrayed against conservative Southerners in the name of
defending minorities.

And if you go even further back in time, this mirrors the English Civil War of the 1640s.
Briefly, the people that came to Massachussets were the ideological descendants of the
Roundheads, and the ones who settled Virginia 20 years later were the descendants
of the Cavaliers, so it isn’t a surprise that descendants of the same two tribes went
to war about 200 years later92 in the mid 1800s, or that their ideological descendants
are gearing up for another conflict right about now. See Scott Alexander’s review of
Albion’s Seed for the quick version.


Not Everything Flipped

You could plot the geographical, demographic, and ideological coalitions of the two
parties over the last 155 years. You’d see a few different staggered sine wave-like
phenomena before they snap into the funhouse mirror image of 1865 that is 2021. But
if we drill into the ideological aspects of the flip we see some interesting things.

At the surface level, the symbols remain intact: Democrats and Republicans still use
the same logos, just like the Chinese Communist Party has kept the hammer and sickle
more than 40 years after Deng Xiaoping’s capitalist revolution. On a policy level, as
noted, not everything has flipped: Democrats remain pro-choice, Republicans remain
pro-life. But on an ideological level, that’s worth a bit of discussion.

Certain kinds of people are born revolutionaries. So when the Democrats flipped over
from revolutionary class to ruling class, when they shifted from (say) “defunding the
police” to funding the Capitol Police93, the born revolutionaries got off the bus. It’s
not necessarily any one issue like the police, or military, or COVID restrictions, or
regulations – the trigger is different for each person – but the common theme is that the
born revolutionary just has a problem with what they perceive as irrational authority.

   92The fact that the same two tribes keep fighting periodically over at least 400 years means we might
reconceptualize the specific reasons for their fight as more irreducibly tribal than passingly ideological,
more like Hatfields and McCoys than any grand battle of ideas. In this framework, if one tribe adopts
left tactics the other must adopt right tactics, and vice versa.
   93Yes, the flip was already baked many years before this, but this is a particularly obvious public
example.

129
128                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Visualize the startup founder who just cannot adjust to a big company after an ac-
quisition, or the writer who just refuses to hold back a story because of his editor’s
political demurrals. Born revolutionaries of this stripe include Glenn Greenwald, Matt
Taibbi, Jack Dorsey, Elon Musk, and many Substackers and tech founders. They just
can’t bend to the establishment. But they also have real disagreements with each
other, which is why they’re independents, and why they can’t mouth a party line. So
the born revolutionary is really far more anti-establishment, and hence today anti-
Democrat, than pro-Republican. Many of the most accomplished in tech and media
share this characteristic – they don’t want to listen to authority because they think they
know better, and in their case they often actually do. They’re fundamentally insubor-
dinate and disobedient, rule breakers and novelty seekers, ideological rather than tribal,
founders rather than followers — and thus sand in the gears of any establishment.

Other kinds of people are ideologically predisposed in the opposite direction, to what
some might call “imperialism” and others could call “national greatness.” As the Re-
publicans fully flipped over from ruling class to revolutionary class, and went from or-
ganizing the invasion of Iraq to disorganizedly invading the Capitol, the neocon types
like David Frum and Liz Cheney switched sides. In our tech analogy, these are the big
company executives who only join a company once it has 1000+ people and leave out
the back when the writing is on the wall. They’ll take less upside in return for less
downside, and are more focused on guaranteed salary and prestige. They’re cyclical,
as opposed to counter-cyclical like the revolutionaries. They follow the school-of-fish
strategy, going with the crowd at all times. And in this context, their animating charac-
teristic is not so much that they’re “pro-Democrat” but that they’re anti-revolutionary.
Much of the national security state and military establishment is also like this; they are
fundamentally rule-followers, institutional loyalists, and top-down in their thinking.

So that means that right now, immediately after the American realignment, we see
all four types: (a) revolutionary class Democrats who still think of their party as the
underdog, (b) ruling class Republicans who similarly (as David Reaboi would put it)
“don’t know what time it is,” (c) revolutionary anti-establishment types like Greenwald,
and (d) ruling class anti-revolutionaries like Frum and Cheney.

Over time, if history is any guide, the independent thinkers will move away from
the ruling class to the revolutionary class, while a much larger group of herd-minded
followers will join the ruling class. Returning to our tech analogy94, think about how
a few of the most independent-minded people have left Google, while many more risk-
averse people have joined it. At Google, there isn’t much of the early startup spirit left,
but there is a paycheck and stability.95 That’s similar to the dynamic that characterizes
the Democrats in their formal role as America’s ruling class: they largely control the
establishment, but they’re losing the talent.

   94Again, the reason we use the startup-to-bigco analogy so much is because it’s one of the few
long-term cycles that millions of people are familiar with today. We can’t lean on the history of, say,
Rome as heavily because it’s just not taught by schools or movies.
   95Facebook is the exception here, the tech company with the most potential for rebirth and internal
alignment, because it’s still led by its original founder. It’s what Samo Burja would call a “live player.”

130
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            129


The Second American Civil War?

Returning to the previous section, is 2021 really just a repeat of 1865? Well, if history
is running in reverse as per the Future-is-our-Past thesis, maybe not. Maybe 1861-1865
has yet to happen; maybe the Second American Civil War is yet to come. We discuss
this possibility later in our sci-fi scenario on American Anarchy.


However, if we really push on the historical analogies, there’s another factor that was
just incipient during the 1860s but that dominated the era to follow. After North-vs-
South slugged it out, America shifted its attention to the (Wild) West. Similarly, after
whatever Democrat-vs-Republican donnybrook might ensue, we may shift our focus to
tech.


Because technology is a third faction. A group that was once identified with the West
Coast before the pandemic, but is now best thought of as decentralized network.


At least, about half of it can be thought of in this way. The technology companies
still physically headquartered in Silicon Valley would likely be heavily involved on
the US establishment side in any Second American Civil War, providing surveillance,
deplatforming, and digital enforcement for the ruling class. But the decentralized global
technologists — those that are into the overlapping but quite different movements that
are BTC and web3 — would have a very different attitude. They may not really
be “pro-Republican”, but they would be anti-ruling-class, and especially against the
inflation and censorship the ruling class would need to support its war machine. Any
truly global, decentralized platform would natively resist censorship requests by the
US establishment.


That may be the next step in the American Flippening: the conflict between the
decentralized people of the Network and the centralized people of the State, between
global technology and the American establishment.






The Global Flippening


The third flippening is about the global reversal of the last 30 years, where the com-
munist countries became ethnonationalists and the capitalist countries became ethno-
masochists. In this flippening, the countries on the economic left moved to the cultural
right, and countries on the economic right moved to the cultural left. The ideologies
reversed, but the geopolitical rivalries remained the same.

131
130                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY






















The visual above tells the story. The most right-wing country in the world is now
CCP China, the ethnocentric champion of the Han, the place where “sissy men” are
now banned from TV and whose self-admitted goal is irredentist reunification. Its
core premise is ethnonationalism, which can be paraphrased as “Chinese people are the
best.”96

Conversely, Woke America is to America as Soviet Russia was to Russia. It is the
most left-wing country in the world, the place where whites go to the back of the line
for vaccinations and the self-admitted sponsor of global revolution. Its core premise is
ethnomasochism, which can be paraphrased as “white people are the worst”.97

At this point, you may be sputtering in disbelief, in which case I refer you to these96
two97 footnotes to give a tissue for that sputtering. You may think this is obvious, in
which case read this section only for entertainment. You may argue that the right and
left categories have no meaning; if so, go read the earlier section on the spatial theory of
voting and note that there’s always a first principal component in any map of ideology
space. Or you just may be confused, contending that the US is still “conservative” and
China is still “communist,” and want proof of the switch.

So here’s the detailed argument.


   96If you want a citation on Chinese ethnonationalism, the US DoD wrote about this in The Strategic
Consequences of Chinese Racism: A Strategic Asymmetry for the United States. As they noted “In
Chinese history and contemporary culture, the Chinese are seen to be unique and superior to the rest
of the world. Other peoples and groups are seen to be inferior, with a sliding scale of inferiority.”
   97If you really need a cite on American ethnomasochism, here’s an employee of the establishment’s
paper of record stating that “racism is in everything. It should be considered in our science reporting, in
our culture reporting, in our national reporting. And so, to me, it’s less about the individual instances
of racism, and sort of how we’re thinking about racism and white supremacy as the foundation of all
of the systems in the country.”

132
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            131


The Global Axis in 1988 was Politico-Economic

First, what was the political spectrum in 1988, right before the fall of the Berlin Wall?
From right to left:

      USA: center right under Reagan

      Western Europe (NATO): center / center right

      Switzerland: neutral center

      PRC: migrating right, less ideological, hard to place under Deng Xiaoping

      India: left, socialist

      USSR, Warsaw Pact: far left

I don’t think any of these ideological positions should be too controversial. These
countries explicitly identified themselves as conservative, socialist, or communist re-
spectively. India was socialist, but not a member of the Warsaw Pact and not pointing
guns at the West. China was nominally communist, but also not hostile to the West,
and entering the second decade of the capitalist reforms begun by Deng in 1978. The
US was the champion of the capitalist right in spots like Chile and South Korea, and
the USSR was the global sponsor of the communist left in places such as Cuba and
North Korea.

The Global Axis in 2022 is Ethno-Cultural

By 2022, what did the global political spectrum look like, right after the Russo-Ukraine
war?

      US Establishment: ethnomasochist far left, denoted by the Progress Flag

      Western Europe: center left, but with increasing variance

      BTC/web3: pseudonymous center

      India, Israel, Singapore, Visegrad: center right

      Republican America: nationalist right

      CCP China, Russia: ethnonationalist far right, the Z flag and “We Will Always
        Be Here”

The first thing we note is that the major axis has shifted. The primary axis is no longer
the politico-economic axis of capitalism-vs-communism, but the ethno-cultural axis of
ethnomasochism-vs-ethnonationalism. Is it the ultimate evil for a state to consciously
represent its majority race (as America contends) or is it the ultimate good (as China
contends)? Or should it be neither, as the pseudonymous economy contends?

The second thing we see is that the middle has shifted. Switzerland is no longer
neutral, as it’s siding with the US now. Cryptocurrency and cryptography is now

133
132                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Switzerland, what Obama called the “Swiss bank account in your pocket.” And – as
just noted – it offers an ethical alternative to both American ethnomasochism and
Chinese ethnonationalism, namely pseudonymous meritocracy.

The third thing we note is that we don’t use the American flag to represent the US
establishment as it is very much a disputed symbol, with some in the establishment
claiming it while others claim it is disturbing. So instead, we use the Progress Flag
for the US establishment as (a) this is proudly raised by the State Department and in
the White House and (b) it sharply distinguishes the establishment from a Republican
America that very much does not fly the Progress Flag, but might instead fly the Thin
Blue Line flag or (eventually) the flag of Bitcoin Maximalism.98

The fourth thing (which is not on the figure) is that we don’t think of Republican
America as coincident with the US establishment anymore. That’s because the US
is a binational state with two warring ethnicities (Democrat and Republican) rather
than a single nation state. We didn’t put a separate Republican flag on the figure,
though, as placing it on the nationalist right would seem to cluster it near China, and
Republicans dislike China as much as they dislike the Democrats. So you need to go
to more dimensions than just a linear axis, which we discuss in the next chapter on
NYT/CCP/BTC.

The fifth thing we note is that Europe is now broadly to the right of the US Estab-
lishment on ethno-cultural issues, whereas it was to the left of the US in 1988. (See
Macron and Orban’s comments, for example, if this isn’t on your radar.)

The last and most important thing is that this is a rough inversion of the 20th century,
as the formerly communist/socialist countries are on the ethnocultural right, while the
capitalist bloc is on the ethnocultural left.


Evidence for the Global Political Spectrum of 2022

How can we establish that this ethnocultural axis is a reasonable one-dimensional
representation of reality? Let’s do it in stages.

    1. Existence of an axis. First, the #1 and #2 powers of this era are the US and
         China, establishing these as the poles of some axis in the first place.

               Here’s a graph of global GDP, showing the US and China as #1 and #2.

               Here’s a graph of global military power, again #1 and #2.

               Here’s Ian Bremmer’s G-2 concept.

   98For example, the Thin Blue Line flag is the Twitter cover photo of cryptocurrency pioneer Nick
Szabo. His worldview is actually logically consistent, in that he’s effectively a minarchist rather
than an orthodox crypto-anarchist. He is for the kind of positive-sum society that allows people to
peacefully build wealth, and therefore against looting and rioting. While he can rely on cryptography
to defend his Bitcoin, he supports the police to maintain order for everything else.

134
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            133


             And here are several books and articles that talk about this include Destined
                for War, The United States vs. China (FT review), and Getting China
                Wrong.

    2. Unity of NYT, Harvard, and Democrats as the US Establishment. Next, let’s
        establish that there is alignment between America’s informal government (NYT,
        Harvard, etc) and the formal government (elected Democrats and career bureau-
        crats). Basically, we want to show that (a) this an interconnected social network
        and (b) it is on the ethnomasochist left.

             The Progress Flag was raised over the U.S. State Department and

             The Progress Flag is raised in the White House by the US Press Secretary
                and a Navy Admiral

             97% of journalists’ political donations went to Democrats

             90.1% of Harvard students voted Democrat

             98.82% of partisan contributions at Harvard’s FAS went to Democrats

             90% of professors at top universities are Democrat

             NYT’s use of ethnomasochist words went exponential in the 2010s

             The graphs in Yglesias’ article on the Great Awokening show that white
                Democrats are to the cultural left of black Democrats on many issues

    3. NYT denunciation of entities to their right. Third, let’s show that the US estab-
        lishment’s leading paper, the New York Times, has run articles indicating that
        China, Russia, India, Israel, Singapore, Hungary, and France are “fascist” and
        “authoritarian” and hence to its right. We note that none of these countries are
        being denounced as “communist” or to NYT’s left.

             China: “Can China Be Described as ’Fascist’ ?”

             Russia: “We Should Say It. Russia Is Fascist.”

             India: “The Rise of Modi: India’s Rightward Turn”

             Israel: “Israelis May Have Committed Crimes Against Humanity in Gaza
                Protests, U.N. Says”

             Singapore: “David Marshall, 87, Opponent Of Singapore Authoritarianism”

             Hungary: “He Used to Call Viktor Orban an Ally. Now He Calls Him a
                Symbol of Fascism.”

             France: “France’s Far Right Turn”

    4. China and Russia are to the cultural right of the US. Next, let’s establish that
        China and Russia take culturally conservative positions on marriage and family
        that put them substantially to the right of today’s West.

135
134                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



               Russia: see their actions in favor of “traditional families”, and Richard Hana-
                  nia’s piece on Russia the “Great Satan in the Liberal Imagination”.

               China: read about their ban on “sissy men” and promotion of traditional
                  marriage and family.

    5. Europe is also to the cultural right of America. Now, let’s show how European
         countries have put out statements noting that they are actually also to the right
         of America on ethnocultural issues, albeit not as far from the US as China and
         Russia are.

               France on wokeness: Macron, France Reject American “Woke” Culture
                  That’s “Racializing” Their Country

               Visegrad on immigration: Visegrad Four grouping push back on new EU
                  migration plan

               UK on immigration: The UK’s “Anti-Refugee Bill”: What Everyone Should
                  Know

So if you put all those together, we have (a) the existence of a US/China axis, (b) a
group of institutions that can be reasonably regarded as the voice of the US establish-
ment, (c) a set of NYT denunciations of other countries as being to the right of the US
establishment, (d) positions from China and Russia that are far to the ethnocultural
right of the US establishment, and (e) a set of statements from European heads of state
like Macron and Orban indicating that the US establishment is also to their left.

Note that even if you dispute the absolute position of any given country on this axis,
it’s now hard to argue with their relative position. That is, if you click the links above,
you’ll see that NYT does think of Russia and China (and France, Hungary, India,
Israel, and so on) as all being to its right on ethnocultural matters. And Russia and
China do think of the US establishment as being to their left on the same things.

I belabor this point because it’s somewhat implicit. The capitalist-vs-communist di-
vide of the 20th century was an official, declared economic divide. By contrast, today’s
ethnonationalist-vs-ethnomasochist divide is an unofficial, undeclared cultural divide.
It is nevertheless the primary global axis of conflict, and a very real reason for hos-
tility between the Sino-Russians and the US Establishment.99 Even if the geopolitics
have remained similar, with the Chinese and Russians of Mackinder’s world island still
aligned against the Anglo-Americans, the ideologies have flipped.

   99To make this explicit, see this declassified DoD briefing from 2013. Here, the US military recom-
mends calling China ’racist’ to help win its defense competition, and to push these messages through
pop cultural figures rather than directly through official spokesmen. Here’s a quote: “The ‘China is
a racist state’ message of the United States will help win allies in global, popular culture, which is
heavily influenced by ideals rooted in Western, left wing political thought, including strong currents
of anti-racism. Popular cultural figures from film, music, television, and sports, will be far better able
to call attention to China’s racism for younger audiences worldwide than will official or semi-official
Washington.”

136
2.8. LEFT IS THE NEW RIGHT IS THE NEW LEFT                                            135



The Historical Flippenings

Our fourth flippening story is a survey of historical flippenings. How did the revolu-
tionary class become the ruling class, through history?

      From Christian crash to Christian kings. Early Christianity was the original
        communism; it delegitimized and then tore down the Roman Empire. Then,
        many generations later, the Holy Roman Empire that consciously took the name
        of its distant predecessor turned Christianity into what Nietzsche called a “master”
        religion, one that fortified hierarchy rather than undermining it. Christians were
        on the left in Roman times as the revolutionary class. Then, upon winning,
        descendants of those Christians eventually went to the right as the ruling class.

      From Protestant heresy to WASP establishment. Much later, Martin Luther be-
        gan a Protestant insurgency against the Catholic Church / Holy Roman Empire.
        Even later than that, descendants of these Protestants made it to the US to give
        rise to the WASP aristocracy! Protestants were on the left as the revolutionary
        class. Then upon winning, eventually descendants of those Protestants went to
        the right as the ruling class.

      From ChiCom revolutionary to princeling. Today’s Chinese Communist Party is
        another example. What do people call the descendants of the early Communists,
        who fought both the Japanese and the Chinese Nationalists under Chiang Kai-
        Shek to gain full control of China? Why, they are princelings. A more cut-and-
        dried example of the transition from revolutionary class to ruling class would be
        hard to find.

      From marginalized minority to Woke Capital. And perhaps the most important
        contemporary example is Woke Capital. The women, minorities, and LGBT
        groups that replaced the working class as the Democrat party’s base are now to
        Woke America what workers and peasants were to Soviet Russia: their mascots,
        with all politics done in their name. It didn’t really matter to the communists
        that workers and peasants actually went to the gulag in the Soviet Union, and it
        doesn’t really matter to the wokes if women and minorities actually suffer from
        crime and inflation in Woke America – what matters for the movement is the
        power gained by the rhetoric.

        So the CIA and Army now frontpage their female spies and soldiers. The US
        State Department tells us Black Lives Matter. And when American helicopters
        descend on their targets they do so while flying the rainbow flag. The meme
        is now real: wokeness now justifies American nationalism just as Communism
        rationalized Russian imperialism. It’s what tells those pulling the triggers that
        they’re killing for a higher cause, that they’re morally superior to those in the
        gunsights. It’s the revolutionary ideology that justifies the ruling class.

We could do more, but you see the pattern. Once you’ve seen several cases of historical
flippenings, it changes your perspective on current events. The ideological shifts become
more predictable. It’s a bit like an experienced investor who’s seen many a company rise

137
136                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



and fall talking to a first-time entrepreneur. When you’ve seen it before, the pattern
recognition calms your nerves and allows you to distinguish the truly “unprecedented”
from the highly precedented.


2.9 The One Commandment


2.9.1 Communities are Causes First, Companies Second

Every new startup society needs to have a moral premise at its core, one that its
founding nation subscribes to, one that is supported by a digital history that a more
powerful state can’t delete100, one that justifies its existence as a righteous yet peaceful
protest against the powers that be.101

To be clear, it’s a huge endeavor to go and build an entire moral edifice on par with a
religion, and work out all the practical details. We’re not advising you come up with
your own Ten Commandments!

But we do think you can come up with one commandment. One new moral premise.
Just one specific issue where the history and science has convinced you that the estab-
lishment is wanting. And where you feel confident making your case in articles, videos,
books, and presentations.

These presentations are similar to startup pitch decks. But as the founder of a startup
society, you aren’t a technology entrepreneur telling investors why this new innovation
is better, faster, and cheaper. You are a moral entrepreneur telling potential future
citizens about a better way of life, about a single thing that the broader world has
gotten wrong that your community is setting right.

By focusing on just one issue, you can set up a parallel society with manageable com-
plexity, as you are changing only one civilizational rule. Unlike a political party, you’re
not offering a package deal on many issues that people only shallowly care about. With
the one commandment you are instead offering a single issue community, and attracting
not single-issue voters but single-issue movers.


The Concept of a Parallel Society

Just as a note on terminology, we consider a startup society to be a new community
built internet-first, premised on a societal critique of its parent community, and founded
for the purpose of addressing that specific societal problem in an opt-in way – namely,
by recruiting people online to voluntarily form an alternative society that shows a
better way. The implication is that a startup society is still pretty small and near the
beginning of its ambition, just like a startup company.

 100Seems like a high bar, but scholarly archives, search engines, and social networks keep getting
silently censored. And sometimes not so silently. So you need something like IPFS or Bitcoin to store
a state-resistant digital history.
 101As Antonio Garcia-Martinez put it, “would you die for the DAO?”

138
2.9. THE ONE COMMANDMENT                                                                         137


A parallel society is roughly equivalent to a startup society, but the implication is that
it could be much larger in scale. It’s parallel because it stands apart from mainstream
society as a parallel version, as a fork. It’s not set up in opposition to the mainstream on
every dimension, but a parallel society is certainly differentiated from the mainstream
on a key axis.

You can think of the relationship between “startup society” and “parallel society” as
similar to the relationship between “startup” and “tech company”; the former is early
stage, while the latter can be of any stage.

The analogy works in another way. Just like a “tech company” can refer to a fully
remote organization, a partially physical company with some office space, or a globally
recognized multinational like Google, a “parallel society” is also an umbrella term that
can denote a wholly digital network union, a partially physical network archipelago, or
a diplomatically recognized network state.

That’s important, because you may be able to realize the goals of your startup society
with a purely digital network union, you may need the physical footprint of a network
archipelago, or you might need the formal legal recognition of a full network state. It
all depends on the nature of your one commandment: can it be accomplished purely
at the community level, does it require a physical buildout, or does it require changes
to the legal system?

A few specific examples will make this clear. We’ll describe startup societies based on a
wholly digital network union, others based on a partially physical network archipelago,
and yet others that need diplomatically recognized network states.


2.9.2 Examples of Parallel Societies: Digital Network Unions

Renewal Culture: the Cancel-Proof Society

Let’s start with an easy example of a one commandment-based startup society, which
only requires a purely digital network union and doesn’t require a full physical footprint
like a network archipelago, let alone diplomatic recognition like a network state.

This is the cancel-proof society.

Suppose you’re the hypothetical founder of this startup society. You begin with a
history of the last 15 years showing all the bizarre examples of social media cancellation,
something like Jon Ronson’s So You’ve Been Publicly Shamed.

You note that these cancellations represent a moral failure by the people of the State
and the CEOs of the Network. Their partisan warfare and engagement algorithms
trapped many innocents in the crossfire of social war. Now a stray comment by a
civilian is routinely turned into a human sacrifice to make an ideological point. It’s as
if a passerby took such offense to your oine comment to a friend that they opened
fire.

139
138                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


Those who agree that normal online behavior shouldn’t come with risk of a social
death penalty imposed by random people are the basis of your new society. They agree
with your historically informed, moral critique. And the one commandment may be
something like “cancellation without due process is bad”.

How do you implement this? One solution is just a network union that provides a
combination of (a) guild and (b) cancellation insurance.

You assemble a group of people in a Discord, optionally take a stake in each other by
issuing a DAO token, and work together to promote each other’s work and help each
other out. This could be a guild of, say, graphic designers or young adult fiction writers
or electrical engineers. The token of the DAO would be optional – it wouldn’t be meant
to be some massive new thing like Ethereum. It’s just a way to record who contributed
time and/or money to the startup society, and how much they did. People would give
in order to get, a bit like StackOverflow Karma. And those with more money than
time may buy the token to support those in the guild with more time than money.

Now, 99% of the time this startup society is just doing “peacetime” activities, like
helping people find jobs, organizing promotion for new product launches of members,
facilitating introduction, or just hanging out at meetups.

But 1% of the time someone in the guild is under social attack. In that situation, the
guild can choose to publicly respond as one or — if grievously outnumbered — can
quietly support the affected party with a new job after the uproar has died down. In
such a circumstance, the one commandment kicks in, and there is internal due process
around the attempted cancellation. Did the person actually do something wrong, and
if so, is the correct penalty more like a hundred-dollar fine or an apology rather than
a career-ruining publicly calumny?

The concept is that this kind of startup society serves a dual purpose: it’s useful in
“peacetime” but it also gives people a community to fall back on in the event of digital
cancellation. And that’s how one could build a cancel-proof culture.


2.9.3 Examples of Parallel Societies: Physical Network Archipela-
              gos

Keto Kosher: the Sugar-free Society

Next, let’s do an example which requires a network archipelago (with a physical foot-
print) but not a full network state (with diplomatic recognition).

This is Keto Kosher, the sugar-free society.

Start with a history of the horrible USDA Food Pyramid, the grain-heavy monstrosity
that gave cover to the corporate sugarification of the globe and the obesity epidemic.
Also discuss the cure in the form of keto and low-carb diets.

Then operationalize this cure in the form of a partially physical network archipelago.

140
2.9. THE ONE COMMANDMENT                                                                                     139



Organize a community online that crowdfunds properties around the world, like apart-
ment buildings and gyms, and perhaps eventually even culdesacs and small towns. You
might take an extreme sugar teetotaller approach, literally banning processed foods and
sugar at the border, thereby implementing a kind of “Keto Kosher.”

You can imagine variants of this startup society that are like “Carnivory Communities”
or “Paleo People”. These would be competing startup societies in the same broad area,
iterations on a theme.

If successful, such a society might not stop at sugar. It could get into setting cultural
defaults for fitness and exercise. Or perhaps it could bulk purchase continuous glucose
meters for all members, or orders of metformin.


Digital Sabbath: the Partially Oine Society

Cars are on balance a good thing. But you can overdo them. Mid-century America
did. It obscured the San Francisco waterfront with ugly elevated highways, impeding
the walkability of this beautiful area. That highway was removed in the late 20th
century.102 And the removal was an acknowledgement that sometimes we can have too
much of a good thing.

24/7 internet connectivity is like that. It’s good that we’re doing things like Starlink,
to bring internet access to the entire world, to provide free online education, and to
get them into the global economy.

But it’s bad if you can never disconnect from the internet. That’s why apps like
“Freedom” are so popular. That’s why people use commitment devices like timed cookie
jars to hide their phones. That’s why apps like Twitter and Snapchat got popular on the
basis of artificial constraints, like limited characters or disappearing messages, because
they were optimizing for fallible humans rather than infallible machines. That’s why
Tsinghua cuts off the internet at night, why Apple now provides screen time metrics,
and why books like Atomic Habits and Indistractible sell so well.

What if this optimization for fallibility didn’t have to be an individual thing? What
if there were a society that helped you with internet distractions and self-control, that
recognized that the internet was good, but that times and places without the internet
were also good — just as cars are good, but a San Francisco waterfront without cars
is also good?

One way of accomplishing this would be a Digital Sabbath society where the internet is
just shut off at night, from 9pm to 9am. Some buildings and rooms would furthermore
be enclosed in Faraday cages, to put them oine on purpose. Areas would start to
be flagged as online and oine areas, a bit like smoking and non-smoking areas on
planes. All internet use would be conscious and focused, as opposed to unconscious
and involuntary.

 102Of course, fentanyl addicts were soon added in its place. But there was a window where people
benefited from the walkable waterfront.

141
140                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


Over time, such a society could even try to build apps to give individuals back control
over their internet use, with open source machine learning tools running locally on
devices in a privacy-protecting way to prioritize notifications, block distractions, and
encourage productivity.

The Digital Sabbath society is an example of a network archipelago that’s focused on
improving self-control around internet use. For obvious reasons, you’d need a physical
footprint, and wouldn’t be able to do this purely digitally.


2.9.4 Examples of Parallel Societies: Recognized Network
              States

Your Body, Your Choice: the post-FDA Society

Now let’s do a more difficult example, which will require a full network state with
diplomatic recognition.

This is the medical sovereignty zone, the FDA-free society.

You begin your startup society with Henninger’s history of FDA-caused drug lag and
Tabarrok’s history of FDA interference with so-called “off label” prescription. You
point out how many millions were killed by its policies, hand out t-shirts like ACT-UP
did, show Dallas Buyers Club to all prospective residents, and make clear to all new
members why your cause of medical sovereignty is righteous.

But to actually achieve personal medical sovereignty, your startup society would need
some measure of diplomatic recognition from a sovereign outside the US — or perhaps
a state within the US. It would need to actually be what we call a network state, as it
would need legal recognition from an existing government.

For the case of doing it outside the US, your startup society would ride behind, say, the
support of Malta’s FDA for a new biomedical regime. For the case of doing it within
the US, you’d need a governor who’d declare a sanctuary state for biomedicine. That
is, just like a sanctuary city declares that it won’t enforce federal immigration law, a
sanctuary state for biomedicine would not enforce FDA writ.

With this diplomatic recognition, you could then take the existing American codebase
and add one crucial new feature: the absolute right for anyone to buy or sell any
medical product without third party interference. Your body, your choice. That’s how
you’d get an FDA-free zone.


2.9.5 Analysis of Parallel Societies

Now we see why a focused moral critique is so important. It combines (a) the moral
fervor of a political movement with (b) the laser-focus of a startup company into (c) a
one-commandment based startup society.

142
2.9. THE ONE COMMANDMENT                                                                                     141



Such a society is not a total revolution. We aren’t starting completely de novo. Each
startup society is simply taking a broken aspect of today’s world, often a State-caused
or at least State-neglected calamity, writing the history of that state failure, and then
building an opt-in community to solve the problem.

It’s a tightly focused parallel society making one impactful change.


Why Not More Than One Commandment?

Why is it so important to introduce one commandment rather than zero or N?

The short answer is that you don’t want to write something as complex as a social
operating system from scratch, and in fact others will prevent you from doing so. But
you also don’t want to avoid innovating on a broken society. So introducing one (1)
tightly focused change at a time in a startup society with opt-in citizens allows testing
of the new commandment.

The longer answer revolves around an important paradox of modern society: namely,
that many people feel uncomfortable evangelizing religious morals, yet very comfortable
evangelizing their political ethics.

The first part is easy to understand. Westerners are nowadays often shy about telling
others to practice their religion. Why? They may feel they haven’t figured it all out,
so who are they to say? Or they know they can’t live up to their ideal moral code,
like someone who wants to diet but can’t always restrain themselves, so they refrain
from commentary to avoid the charge of hypocrisy. They also may not want to be
attacked as a crazy cult leader. All of these are understandable hesitations for either
(a) evangelizing a traditional religion, (b) inventing a wholly new one, or (c) forking an
existing religion. (The last is kind of like starting a new denomination of Protestantism,
where you keep much of the old codebase but add in some crucial distinctive factors.)

But think about the second part. While there is great hesitation in Western society
around religious evangelism, there is seemingly no hesitation around political evange-
lism. Indeed, this is considered an ethical duty, usually in exactly those terms, with
the word “ethical” used in place of “moral” but serving a very similar role, and with at
least two large competing political parties fighting for the souls/votes of their believers.

Therein lies the paradox: while political and religious movements can both be con-
sidered doctrines103, in that they come packaged with a number of directives on how
people must live, the same person who is shy about telling other people about morality
is often incredibly confident when yelling at other people about politics.

That’s why we advise one commandment for your new startup society. It’s something
in between being too shy and too overbearing. It’s in between avoiding religious-
sounding evangelism entirely and indulging in political-sounding evangelism too much.
Don’t avoid taking a moral stance, because that means you passively succumb to your

 103A doctrine can also be based not just on God, or State, but on the Network. That is, not just on
religion, or politics, but on a global coin, like Bitcoin or Ethereum.

143
142                                                      CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY


surroundings. But also don’t try imposing an all-encompassing political ideology to
start, because that’s too hard and means total warfare with your surroundings.

Instead, just pick one flaw in modern society that you do feel confident in building a
startup society to redress, and go with that. One commandment, not zero or N.


What About Older Doctrines?

So far we’ve talked about a one commandment, but implied it is a new moral innovation,
like cutting out sugar or limiting internet use. What about older religions, political
codes, and moral commandments?

You can certainly return to an older known religious code, adopting it in whole or in
part. In a startup society, where everyone opts in, you can make this happen more
easily because religion in many countries is mostly about private practice: so long as
people agree in a peer-to-peer fashion to practice their religion a certain way, the state
allows them to do it.

It’s harder to return to an older political code, because you are now talking about
public law rather than private law. Still, if you build a large enough startup society,
and pick the right laws, there is probably something at the town, city, or province level
that you can do — either within the West or outside it.


2.9.6 Parallel Systems Catalyze Peaceful Reform

How did the US beat the USSR? Because it built and defended a parallel system.

Rewind back to how the Soviet Union fell. As Stephen Kotkin noted in a brilliant
interview, the most important fact about the Soviet Union was that they genuinely
were communists. Outsiders perceived the Soviets to be cynical, but they were wrong;
their cynicism had limits. At the end of the day, the Soviets were devout believers in
their ideology.

How could it be otherwise? Soviet citizens weren’t stupid, and people knew there were
things that didn’t add up, but they were operating within a constrained information
environment. The censorship was so pervasive that it controlled thought. The degree
of self-deception was so all-encompassing that even the nomenklatura like Boris Yeltsin
didn’t know how truly poor the Soviet Union was till he visited an American supermar-
ket and threw up his hands at how far behind the USSR was. Unlike Orwell’s O’Brien,
the Soviet leaders deceived themselves too.

So, fundamentally, any proposed edits by Soviet elites to the USSR would have been
just on the margins. They were information and values constrained. They actually
needed a totally different system. Yet their system resisted both revolutionary and
incremental reform.

The solution was the parallel system of the United States. An alternative society start-
ing from different moral premises that eventually produced undeniably better results.

144
2.9. THE ONE COMMANDMENT                                                                                     143



That’s the same basic thing that reformed the People’s Republic of China. The mere
existence of successful parallel systems in Taiwan, Hong Kong, and especially Singapore
is what drove Deng Xiaoping to adopt capitalism. Ezra Vogel’s book is excellent on
this.

So, in both cases, it was a parallel system that beat the Soviet system and the Maoist
system.


Parallel Systems Once Required Contiguous Land, Now They Don’t

In the 20th century, the only way to build a parallel system was to fight and win a war
(often a hot one) against the communists or fascists who were intent on conquering
your territory. The parallel systems of the US and Singapore, Hong Kong, and Taiwan
were maintained against the USSR and PRC at enormous cost by fighting for large
contiguous regions of land. That was a very State-centric approach.

In the 21st century, our approach suggests a Network-centric way to build parallel
systems: create one opt-in society at a time, purely digitally if need be, justifying it
with a historical/moral critique of the present system that delegitimizes State violence
against them and allows the experiment to continue.

Many will fail, but for those that succeed, we can merge together the good changes and
discard the bad ones, and eventually get a parallel society that differs in many respects
from (say) the original US codebase, but that maintains enough similarity that it’s
“backwards compatible” and citizens can migrate over. Much like the relation of the
USA to Europe during the 1800s, this is a way to reproducibly build a New World on
the internet to reform existing states.


2.9.7 Four Points on One Commandments

Let’s review.

First, by starting with a seemingly simple moral premise and taking to its logical
conclusion, a one-commandment-based startup society ends up changing huge swaths
of life, but in a focused, exit-constrained, and intellectually consistent way.104 Just
think about what “keto” really means when it’s extrapolated out to the scale of an
entire town, and sugar poisoning is taken as seriously as lead poisoning.

Second, one-commandment-based societies allow for scalable, parallel, consensual ex-
ploration of sociopolitical space. Different groups that disagree with each other on how
to live can nevertheless support the meta-concept of many different one-commandment-
based experiments. And indeed, both a carnivore community and vegan village would
likely have better health outcomes than the default Western diet, even if these com-
munities disagree on core moral premises.

 104By “exit-constrained,” we mean that everyone present in a given startup society can cancel their
subscription and leave at any time.

145
144                                                           CHAPTER 2. HISTORY AS TRAJECTORY



Third, there’s a network effect between societies. Each starts off highly focused, of
course —much as a startup company tries to attract customers with a single focused
product, each startup society tries to attract subscribers with a single focused com-
mandment. And as with a startup company, any individual experiment towards a new
sociopolitical order may succeed or fail. But so long as some one-commandment-based
startup societies succeed, they can copy each other’s proven moral innovations.

Fourth, each of these one-commandment-based startup societies is supported by a
history. Listen to someone from the Keto Kosher society and they’ll be able to rattle
off an account of how the USDA Food Pyramid led to epidemic obesity. Chat with a
Benedictine Option monk and you’ll hear about the religious culture they’re trying to
preserve. And talk to a citizen of the post-FDA society and they’ll give you a history of
the few strengths and many weaknesses of the FDA, from ACT-UP to drug lag. Some
such societies are focused on new technologies and some are not, but all of them are
based on an ethical code premised on their reading of history. And that’s why history
is the foundation of any new startup society.

146
Chapter 3



The Tripolar Moment





3.1 NYT, CCP, BTC

Today’s world is becoming tripolar. It is NYT vs CCP vs BTC. That’s the American
Establishment vs the Communist Party of China vs the Global Internet.

Each of these three poles has a source of truth online: paper (NYT), party (CCP1), or
protocol (BTC). Each has a digital economy that surrounds that source of truth: the
dollar economy, the digital yuan2, or the web3 cryptoeconomy. Each pole is a network
in its own right, which stands outside the state; the NYT network gives direction to
the American state, the CCP network leads the Chinese state, and the BTC network
stands outside all states. And each has a governing ideology.

      Woke Capital3 is the ideology of America’s ruling class as explicated by America’s
         ruling newspaper, The New York Times. It’s capitalism that enables decentralized
         censorship, cancel culture, and American empire. It’s drone-strike democracy.

      Communist Capital is the ideology of the Chinese Communist Party. It’s capital-
         ism checked by the centralized power of the Chinese party-state, as summarized
         here: Leninist, Confucianist, Capitalist, and Nationalist.

      Crypto Capital is the international ideology of Bitcoin and web3. It’s stateless
         capitalism, capitalism without corporations, decentralized censorship-resistance,
         and neutral international law. And it’s the second pole within both the US and

    1Some prefer the acronym CPC to CCP. We’re using the one which is standard in Western media.
    2We use the abbreviation for rénmínbì (RMB) rather than yuan (CNY) here, though you’d use
CNY when quoting prices onshore and CNH offshore. See here for the distinction.
    3Woke Capital is a very real phenomenon. If you need proof, watch these two videos: Microsoft
Ignite and Canadian HR. With that said, if the wokes succeed in getting people to stop calling them
woke, or if they pivot from wokeness to American statism, as seems likely, you may need a term with
more staying power. So you might also call these Dollar Capital vs Yuan Capital vs Bitcoin Capital
(to emphasize the reserve currency). Or even Chinese Capital vs American Capital vs Internet Capital
(to emphasize the state-associated nature of the first two, and the stateless nature of the third).


                                                                     145

147
146                                                             CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT



         China, the one that domestic regime opponents align around.

While superficial aspects of these ideologies may shift with circumstance, we claim
these are the only coalitions with the billion-person scale and technological talent to
survive as independent power centers in the all-out digital struggle that has already
commenced. They do have internal divisions, as we’ll get to, but for the time being
every group from companies to states to dissident factions within states will have to
navigate between these poles, the tripolar triangle of the digital world.


3.2 The Dated and the Timeless

Before we go further, let’s note: anything written about current events is, by its nature,
likely to become dated.

It is possible, even likely, that the US Establishment sheds its skin once again, down-
playing wokeness and emphasizing loyalty to the state, just as they transitioned
overnight from the “Global War on Terror” to the domestic war on your tweets.4

It is possible, although less likely, that George Soros, Peter Zeihan, Gordon Chang, and
Roger Garside eventually prove right, that Xi Jinping is displaced from his position
atop the Communist Party of China in the 2022 Party Congress, and/or that the CCP
switches back to “Hide your strength and bide your time.”

And it is possible, although less likely still, that there is some fatal flaw, mathematical
breakthrough, or quantum computer that leads to the irreparable failure of the Bitcoin
protocol.

So why devote a chapter to the NYT/CCP/BTC model at all, if events can overtake
it? Three reasons.

First, we need some model of where the world is, even if imperfect, to steer it where
we want to go. Even if it’s wrong, or wrong in some particulars, it may be usefully
wrong in that the update shows us where we were wrong. We spend the energy to
describe a specific tripolar model of the world because many still think it’s unipolar
or bipolar, as illustrated by this amusing interaction between a journalist and Indian
Foreign Minister S. Jaishankar.

Second, even if major changes do occur, the decline of American empire, the rise of
China, and the ascent of cryptocurrency remain underlying trends involving hundreds
of millions of people that would require tremendous force to stop. We’d notice. And
we consider a few candidates for such tremendous forces later.

Third, there are aspects of the current moment that are not dated at all, but recurrent.

    4Wokeness is after all very much the same as the American Establishment, featuring many of
the same folks on the “right” who advocated for the invasion of Iraq two decades ago. So it’s quite
conceivable the establishment could dial up the “patriotism” and dial down the “progressivism” without
breaking a sweat.

148
3.3. A BIPOLAR AMERICA AND A TRIPOLAR TRIANGLE                                            147



That is, a similar tripolar configuration has occurred before. But first let’s establish
how it came about today.






3.3 A Bipolar America and a Tripolar Triangle


In 1990, as the USSR was clearly falling apart, Charles Krauthammer wrote an influ-
ential essay called the Unipolar Moment. It made the point that with the Cold War at
an end, the US was the sole dominant power on the planet, and would be for roughly
a generation, after which point “multipolarity will come in time.”5 This thesis held up
well: unipolarity was true in the 1990s, mostly true6 in the 2000s, much less true with
the rise of Asia, technology, and American polarization in the 2010s, and no longer true
in the 2020s.


As of 2022, we no longer have a unipolar world. Nor is it just ambiguously multipolar,
with an unspecified number of power centers. Instead, we have a bipolar America and
a tripolar triangle. And we can visualize these poles as follows:
























    5Understandably, neither the global internet nor China were recognized as possible new poles in
his essay. Both were still at the base of their respective exponentials. To Krauthammer’s credit, he
budgeted for known unknowns, poles that could arise which one couldn’t see at that time.
    6Huntington’s alternative Clash of Civilizations thesis began proving more apposite in the 2000s.
He modeled the world not as unipolar, or as a sum of random interstate rivalries, nor as a group of
atomized individuals, but as constituted of civilizational blocs that would eventually clash with each
other.

149
148                                                        CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT


























3.4 Moral Power, Martial Power, Money Power

In the mid-20th century, the decline of the British Empire presaged a three way fight
between a moral power, a martial power, and a money power — roughly, left vs right vs
center. Back then, the Soviet Union was the moral power, the Nazis were the military
power, and the Americans were the money power. Today, NYT is the moral power,
CCP is the martial power, and BTC is the money power.

In each case, we also find that the moral power plants moles for espionage, the martial
power excels at manufacturing, and the money power leads in media. But while in the
mid-20th century these three powers were states, today they are primarily networks.7


3.4.1 Moral State, Martial State, Money State

Back up for a second. How could we possibly say that an entity like the USSR, which
killed millions of people, was a “moral” power? Because the USSR’s primary strategy
was Communist proselytization8, the unceasing evangelism of a malign (but convincing)
moral doctrine that managed to capture more than a third of the earth’s population
by mid-century. It did have a colossal military, but spoke endlessly of peace; it seized
everyone’s property, but claimed it didn’t care about money; and its self-image was
that of saintly selflessness. It is in this sense that the Soviet Union was a moral power.

Its moral power9 allowed it to plant moles in every country, which compensated for its

    7As per our thesis: The Network is the Next Leviathan.
    8See Douglas Hyde’s Dedication and Leadership Techniques.
    9Another way of thinking about it: the Soviets’ moral conviction gave them license to do highly

150
3.4. MORAL POWER, MARTIAL POWER, MONEY POWER                                         149



lack of money and manufacturing. American sympathizers funded the buildout of the
Soviet state, handed it diplomatic recognition, distracted Japan on its behalf, supplied
it with the Lend-Lease Act during WW2 and nuclear weapons afterward, and generally
propped up the USSR throughout its life.10

Nazi Germany also infamously murdered millions of people. While similar to the USSR
in many respects, its primary strategy was different. It was an emphasis on martial
valor, on pure brute force, on the shells that would supposedly hiss louder than any mere
words. It did have an inescapable propaganda apparatus, but its moral preaching was
martial; it did leave some money-oriented businesses intact, but said it was socialist;
its raison d’être was ruthless self-interest. It is in this sense that Nazi Germany was a
martial power.

To support this martial power, the Germans needed a tremendous manufacturing build-
out, which they accomplished. Many historians believe the German military had, on
a pound-for-pound basis, the best equipment in the war. But because they lacked
the capitalist’s ability to cooperate across borders, they drove away some of their best
scientists prior to murdering others, ensuring they’d never gain the atomic bomb. And
because their morality amounted to Aryan supremacy, which didn’t appeal to anyone
other than their co-ethnics, they never managed to build a large enough global coalition
to win - which is why the 70M Germans were eventually beaten by the 50M British,
the 150M Americans, and the 150M Soviets.

As for the mid-century Americans, their primary strategy was democratic capitalism,
as opposed to Soviet communism or national socialism. They preached a morality,
but framed it in terms of a capitalist-friendly four freedoms; they built an arsenal of
democracy, but it arose from their commercial industrial base. It is in this sense that
WW2 America was a money power.

Accompanying the money power was media power, just as capitalism went with democ-
racy. The Americans were much better at media than the Nazis (who couldn’t argue in
English) and incrementally better than the Soviets (whose propaganda was ultimately
undermined by their lack of prosperity). The media battle was a close-run thing, but
in the end blue jeans out-competed the Red Army.

So: in this tripolar configuration, after a titanic struggle, the money power in the center
did end up winning over both the martial power on the right (by 1945) and the moral
power on the left (by 1991).

immoral things, including assassination, terrorism, subversion, and espionage. Click those links or
read Haynes and Klehr’s Venona.
   10“ ‘If the United States had not helped us, we would not have won the war,’ [Khrushchev] wrote in
his memoirs. ‘One-on-one against Hitler’s Germany, we would not have withstood its onslaught and
would have lost the war.” ’
   Read the full piece. The conventional wisdom is that the US won WW2. The unconventional
wisdom is that the Russians did with sheer manpower. The v3 is that the US really did beat Nazi
Germany, because Soviet communists couldn’t profitably coordinate their economy, and needed an
arms bailout from the stable industrial base of the USA.

151
150                                                             CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT



3.4.2 Moral Network, Martial Network, Money Network

Today, the decline of the US empire has led to the rise of a moral power (represented
by NYT), a martial power (CCP), and a money power (BTC). The difference relative
to mid-century is that each of these are networks that are upstream of states, rather
than primarily states themselves.


NYT: The Moral Network

The NYT-centered network of journalists “hold[s] power to account” and thereby stands
above any mere elected government. Its go-to tactics are moral badgering and mole-
driven espionage, just like the Soviet Union.

On the moral point, go back and look at any recent NYT headline and note how many
of the articles involve a moral rather than factual premise as the core point. Free
speech is bad, white people are bad, communism was good. . . this is the kind of thing
they are focused on.11 And it is in this sense that NYT is a moral power.

On the espionage point, as just discussed, we know that the Soviets were past masters
at subversion. Their moral convictions made them feel that invading the privacy of
others, stealing secrets, destroying lives with Zerzetsung12 — all of that was acceptable
for the great moral cause of communism. Because they weren’t as good at building as
the US or even Germany (the Soviet munitions came from America via Lend-Lease),
stealing/destroying was the best thing they could do.

Sulzberger’s employees and American journalists in general are similar. They’re the
Stasi with a stock symbol, the original surveillance capitalists. It’s always phrased in
the passive voice, but how exactly did “The New York Times obtain” the things they
print? The story behind the story is more interesting than the story, and the behind
the scenes footage would show you a different movie than the one they want you to
watch.

In short, much like the communists, the journalists’ moral conviction gives them the
license to doxx private citizens, to go through people’s garbage, to use secret identities
(and then claim they don’t), to print hacked data, to solicit leaks of private information
while demanding to keep their own information private, to induce people to break
contracts, to stalk people at their homes, even to cover up enormous genocides and
start giant wars. . . always in the service of the bottom line, and some purported higher
good.

The establishment journalist claims to speak truth to power, but somehow never gets
around to investigating themselves or each other. As Bloomberg admitted in a moment

   11Of course, they don’t state it quite so explicitly. At least, they used to not do so. Nowadays
the most zealous Sulzberger employees have been pushing for “moral clarity” in all of their articles.
They seem not to realize that it was the facade of objectivity that gave them power, punctuated only
occasionally by an emotive denunciation. Dropping this facade boosted their subscriber numbers,
gaining them money at the expense of power.
   12Yes, technically a Stasi thing, but the GDR was a Soviet puppet state and trained by the Soviets.

152
3.4. MORAL POWER, MARTIAL POWER, MONEY POWER                              151


of candor, they “report on but do not investigate Reuters and CNBC” because they
are “direct rivals”. We occasionally hear about incidents like the episode where ABC
got CBS to fire the Robach leaker, or when NBC tried to stifle Ronan Farrow’s work,
but those are the just the tip of the iceberg. There’s an enormous incentive for estab-
lishment journalists to engage in anti-competitive collusion, because if they all agree
on what is “true”, who can then fact-check them? No one can “hold accountable” those
with the power to hold the government accountable.


CCP: The Martial Network

This one may require the most explanation as it’s the most foreign to Western expe-
rience. First we’ll describe why CCP is primarily a network, and then why it’s now
mainly martial. We don’t pretend to be China experts — few are! — but these are
relatively basic points that are still not that well known.

Why Is CCP a Network?

The CCP network of party members is less separate from the Chinese state, as it doesn’t
pretend to be at a great remove from the levers of power as NYT does. But the party is
not the same as the state. Indeed, there are 95 million CCP members, and they don’t
all have senior government positions anymore than every registered Democrat has a
plum spot in the Biden administration. Instead, they are spread out through society.
How does it work?

Joining the CCP is itself nontrivial, which selects for the most dedicated members.
The South China Morning Post outlines the “arduous” application process:

        An application must be filed to the applicant’s closest party committee or
        branch, with a letter explaining:

             why he is applying for membership,

             why he believes in the Communist Party, and

             areas in which he feels he has fallen short of the requirement to become
                a member.

But it doesn’t end there, according to Merics:

        Applicants must write essays on Marxism-Leninism and on current political
        developments. Eight colleagues, neighbors and acquaintances have to vouch
        for an applicant’s reputation.

After applying, the applicant must take courses and then pass an exam, only to then
be put into a yearlong (at least) probationary period:

        The applicant will then attend party courses, where he will learn about
        the party’s constitution, after which he will have to take and pass written
        tests. . .

153
152                                                             CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT



         Upon passing the tests, the applicant will required to submit more materi-
         als to the party branch, including personal information of himself and his
         parents. Information about his employment and his parents’ political affil-
         iations also have to be disclosed. Probationary party membership will be
         granted upon:

               passing the screening,

               being recommended by two party members, and

               discussions and approval after a meeting with the party branch. . .

         Probation lasts at least a year. At the end of the probation period, the
         party branch decides whether to admit the applicant, extend the probation
         or expel him.

Lest one misbehave during the probationary period, there are consequences if the ap-
plicant does not behave up to strict standards:

         In the ensuing one-year probation period, the admission process can still
         be stopped if “party discipline” is breached.

And if you are finally cleared by the Party to join, you have a lifelong commitment to
uphold, as Mo Chen writes:13

         When the CCP hold a top tier meeting, you will be in your local party
         branch conference room to watch it live, and write essay on thoughts after
         view.

         Natural disasters happen, donate, mandatory. Oh you don’t know where
         to find the donation box? Don’t worry, it is deducted already from your
         salary. . .

         Everytime the Chairman of China releases important article address the
         issues of current affairs and overarching strategy for the next five years,
         you write that article 10 times, handwritten, due tomorrow. Thankfully,
         these are like, once every five years.

         If you break the law, no matter how small, you get a “Party Internal Warn-
         ing” post. And yes, you write [a] reflection essay about what had led you
         astray, and how wrong you realize you are. . . If it is serious, you are back to
         probation period. . . even more serious? The double policy, you lose both
         your party status and office title. . .

   13Despite their 95M person scale, CCP members comprise only 7% of China’s massive 1.4B popula-
tion, which is why admission can be so selective. Indeed, as described, the process selects for diligence,
ideological alignment, and moderate levels of intelligence and initiative: enough smarts and ambition
to fill out an application to be part of an important group, but not enough to do something off the
beaten track. In other words, it’s similar to modern America’s college application process.

154
3.4. MORAL POWER, MARTIAL POWER, MONEY POWER                                         153



Seems very alien to aWestern mindset! What people would choose to constantly post
new essays regurgitating the latest in regime propaganda, and indoctrinating their
coworkers and family members? But it all fits if you think of them as China’s New
York Times subscribers.

Think about this scene in Team America: World Police, where the Janeane Garofalo
figure says, “As actors, it is our responsibility to read the newspapers, and then say
what we read on television like it’s our own opinion.” Then, just swap out the NYT
mobile app with Xuexi Qiangguo.

As the saying goes, “Party, government, army, society and education, east, west, south
and north, the party leads on everything.” It’s almost the same for the American
Establishment, except the paper leads on everything. America’s CCP are its NPCs.


Why Is CCP Martial?

From 1978 to 2013, from Deng Xiaoping to Jiang Zemin to Hu Jintao, the CCP was
focused on economic growth. But under Xi Jinping, it’s taken a turn towards militarist
nationalism. It builds most of the world’s physical products, its military budget is
already >1/3 that of America’s, it has a more focused task (“reunify China” rather
than “police the world”), it produces military recruiting videos like We Will Always Be
Here, and - most importantly - it is investing heavily in AI and drones.

On that last point, China is just better at deployment in the physical world than the
US government or military, as we can see from (a) the public infrastructure comparison,
(b) the multibillion dollar failures of the American Ford-class aircraft carrier, the F-35
manned aircraft, the Littoral Combat Ship, and the Zumwalt destroyer, and (c) the
fact that all the manufacturing know-how and the factories themselves are in China.

Robotics could shift manufacturing out of China, but until then it is quite possible that
the “arsenal of democracy” is more like the “arsenal of communism.”14

Note however that just because China becomes primarily a martial power does not
mean it will necessarily win a physical conflict. The Nazis too in our framework were
primarily a martial power, and did not win. Then again, while the Nazis were out-
numbered by the US/UK/USSR by a 5:1 ratio (70M to 350M), the Chinese outnumber
the Americans by a roughly 4:1 ratio (1.4B to 330M), so past performance may not be
predictive of future results.

   14If you’re interested in a counterargument, Peter Zeihan has written at length about how weak he
thinks China is, how its economy will fail, its demographics will mean it grows old before it grows
rich, and how it can’t field a blue water navy. You can read his work here.
   I disagree for the reasons stated here. In short, China makes physical things, so the underpinnings
of its economy are more robust in crunchtime than one based on inflation and importation. It is
amazing at automation, and robotics trumps demographics when it comes to manufacturing or military
prowess. And it ships goods all over the world, is buying ports with debt-trap diplomacy, and can
build infrastructure on a colossal scale even as the US is losing that capability — so it’s implausible
that it won’t ever be able to field a blue water navy, though it might well be an unmanned one.
   See also Christian Brose in the The Kill Chain and Kai-Fu Lee in AI Superpowers.

155
154                                                        CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT



BTC: The Money Network

This one is almost too obvious, so we won’t belabor it. The global network of BTC
holders in a key sense also stands above states, like the NYT network stands above the
American state and the CCP network stands above the Chinese state. Why? Because
it’s very hard for states to seize Bitcoin, in the absence of some kind of quantum
computing breakthrough.

But it’s primarily a money power rather than a moral power like NYT, or a martial
power like CCP.

The less-obvious point is that BTC — and its adjacent group of web3 users — are be-
coming a media power that will eventually topple the NYT, much as the 20th century
US’s media power eventually outcompeted that of the Soviet Union. Why? Decentral-
ized media. You can see early signs of this with Substack, Mirror, and NFTs. . .but in
brief, the best content creators have better things to do than work for the establishment.
They can become publishers of their own, by founding their own media companies. As
with the CCP’s transition to a martial power, the BTC/web3 transition to a money
and media power is not at all conventional wisdom.


3.4.3 Overlaps and Exceptions

Of course, these aren’t pure forms.

NYT is a publicly traded multibillion dollar corporation, and is certainly able to influ-
ence the Fed and other huge flows of money. And it can spur much of the US military
into action with a fake article or three. So it has money and martial power, even if it
is primarily a moral power.

CCP endlessly preaches to its citizens via Xuexi Qiangguo, and until recently was
focused entirely on business. So it has a moral and money power as well, though it is
becoming primarily a martial power.

Finally, Bitcoin certainly makes a set of implicit moral arguments: inflation is bad,
centralization is bad, pseudonymity is good, and the like. And it has a martial power,
though it’s entirely defensive, as the combination of encryption and physical decen-
tralization render it resistant to 20th-century-style military attacks. But it is, perhaps
obviously, fundamentally a money power.

One can do a similar exercise for the US/USSR/NSDAP triangle.


3.5 Submission, Sympathy, Sovereignty

Each pole legitimizes themselves by appealing to a societally useful concept, and takes
it to an extreme as part of denouncing its opposite extreme.

The CCP is the most obvious: you must submit. They’re the Chinese Communist
Party, and they’re powerful, so you must bow your head. This is very simple and

156
3.5. SUBMISSION, SYMPATHY, SOVEREIGNTY                                                          155



straightforward and easy to understand, though it only really works for them within
China and the Chinese internet.

The NYT pole is slightly more subtle: they demand you must sympathize. After all
aren’t you white, or male, or straight, or cis, or abled, or wealthy, or a member of one
of an ever-multiplying number of privileged categories — and therefore an oppressor on
some dimension? Because you’re powerful, you must sympathize, and bow your head
to those you have ostensibly oppressed. It’s a left-handed version of the submission
ideology. It can get anyone to bow their head in the name of empowering them,
because 99.99% of the world is an “oppressor” on at least some dimension. This pole is
strongest on the English-speaking15 internet, weakest on the Chinese internet, and of
intermediate strength outside that.

The BTC pole is the opposite of both of these. It demands you must be sovereign. That
means rather than bending to the CCP, or slitting your wrists as NYT demands, you
hold your head up high. You hold your private keys locally, you don’t trust centralized
corporations or governments, you’re self-sufficient and autarkic, you’re living off the
grid. This pole is strong on the global internet, though it’s facing pushback from both
CCP and NYT.


3.5.1 Extremes and Counter-Extremes Are Undesirable

The subtlety here is that each of these poles has an element of truth to it. You don’t
want a CCP society where everyone has no recourse but to submit, because that can
easily become a now-digital totalitarianism. On the other hand, you also don’t want a
society where no one submits to anyone, because that looks like San Francisco, where
people can run into Walgreens and steal everything.

You don’t want the NYT-run society where everyone has no recourse but to sympa-
thize with the current thing, because that results in what Matt Yglesias has called the
Great Awokening: the emotive and irrational breakdowns that set America on fire and
continue to roil US society. Yet you also don’t want the society where no one sym-
pathizes, because that looks like the Grand Theft Auto environment of 1990s Russia,
the low-trust post-communist society where any cooperative endeavor is regarded as a
scam.

Finally, and perhaps least obviously, you don’t want the society where everyone must
be sovereign, because taken to its irrational16 limit that means pumping your own

   15Once outside the US, it’s obvious that wokeness comes from America. See for example this piece by
the Irish Angela Nagle, or this piece by the UK’s Economist, both of which can see wokeness’ American
origins from the small bit of cultural distance that Europe still affords. Consider the episode when
an American tried to cancel a Finn for using the Finnish word aave. Or the fact that the BLM
protests spread digitally from the US to the rest of the world, while it’s hard to think of a situation
where the reverse has happened. And consider that pronoun choice itself assumes the use of English
(many languages lack gendered pronounces), such that “Latinx” is an American imposition on Spanish
speakers.
   16As you will, Bitcoin Maximalism takes many libertarian leanings to their irrational limits, just as

157
156                                                             CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT



water from out of the ground, growing your own food, not trusting any vendor or
person other than yourself, and generally ending the division of labor that makes cap-
italism run. Extreme autarky might sound romantic, but in the absence of robotic
breakthroughs going truly off-grid is a recipe for dramatic regression in the standard of
living. Conversely, of course you don’t want a society where no one has the possibility
of being sovereign at all, as this leaves us all subject to the not-so-incipient digital
totalitarianism that CCP has already rolled out and NYT wishes it could.


3.5.2 A Recentralized Center

One might argue — and Iwould agree — that while these three poles and their opposite
three extremes are bad, they are not all equally bad, and you don’t necessarily need
to be dead center. For example, I’d personally err much closer to the sovereignty pole
than our current culture, and try to develop the technologies to enable this.

However, we should recognize that different strokes will suit different folks. And rather
than trying to impose preferences on everyone, what we really want are a variety of
points in between these three undesirable poles: different fusions for different groups.

The construction we outline in this book — the startup society that ultimately becomes
a network state – ideally combines aspects of all three. For example, it does have a
clear founder to provide direction, but it ensures every citizen has the right to freely
leave should they choose, that coinholders also have a say, and a number of other digital
checks and balances. This concept is the basis of the recentralized center, an idea we
discuss in depth later.


3.6 Conflicts and Alliances

A tripolar triangle leads to surprisingly complicated dynamics. During the Great De-
pression, FDR’s US admired the Nazis and the NYT wrote encomiums to them, as
documented in Three New Deals and The Gray Lady Winked. Then, after the Molotov-
Ribbentrop Pact, the USSR and the Nazis kicked off World War 2 by invading Poland
together, with the USSR standing by as the Nazis fought the Anglo-Americans, and the
US-aligned UK seriously contemplating bombing the Soviets. Later, the USSR and the
Nazis fought each other during Barbarossa. Then, the US and the USSR teamed up
to fight the Nazis. Finally, the US and USSR split Germany between themselves and
fought each other during the Cold War. That’s why Orwell wrote in 1984 about how
“Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia”17 — because the coalitions between

wokeness takes many liberal precepts to their (il)logical conclusions.
   17“At this moment, for example, in 1984 (if it was 1984), Oceania was at war with Eurasia and in
alliance with Eastasia. In no public or private utterance was it ever admitted that the three powers
had at any time been grouped along different lines. Actually, as Winston well knew, it was only four
years since Oceania had been at war with Eastasia and in alliance with Eurasia. But that was merely
a piece of furtive knowledge which he happened to possess because his memory was not satisfactorily
under control. Officially the change of partners had never happened. Oceania was at war with Eurasia:

158
3.6. CONFLICTS AND ALLIANCES                                                                     157


states switched all the time.

With networks rather than states, the coalitions are even more fluid, with several
existing simultaneously.


3.6.1 One Pole Against Another

NYT vs CCP. This is the obvious one, the Thucydides trap, the Great Power conflict
between the US and China that many have predicted. But there’s a subtlety here.
Many regular Chinese people don’t want such a conflict, and many Americans don’t
either, but those who are invested in imperial ambitions on both sides — the paper
subscribers and the party members — are into it. Networks are driving the states to
war.

NYT vs BTC. This is another obvious one, the American regulatory state (which NYT
is upstream of) against the decentralized network. We are seeing this push with efforts
like the failed 2021 House Bill and the “concerned.tech” letter. Note the demographics
of the signatories to the latter: it is almost entirely white Westerners complaining about
the US establishment losing root control over the global financial system. It is doubtful
that their enthusiasm for the dollar will be shared by Americans hit by inflation — or
by people overseas. This conflict is the American establishment vs the Global Internet.

CCP vs BTC. Yet another obvious one. The CCP has “banned” Bitcoin many times
over the years, but those bans have materially grown in severity. The most recent
action was just short of a seizure.


3.6.2 Two Poles vs the Third

NYT + CCP vs BTC. This is the State vs the Network. It’s when the NYT-controlled
American empire and the CCP-controlled Chinese empire team up to attack BTC,
perhaps on the grounds of “climate” or some other thinly veiled excuse to maintain
state power.

NYT + BTC vs CCP. This is Western voice and exit together vs Eastern control. It’s
when NYT’s interests in disrupting the Chinese regime and BTC’s interests in providing
globally uncensorable savings overlap to provide a thorn in the side for CCP. The web3
part of BTC/web3 becomes particularly important here, because it provides hard-to-
censor global services that complement digital gold, which on its own is necessary but
not sufficient for freedom.

BTC + CCP vs NYT. This is the post-American world against the American empire.
Against the inflating dollar, China and crypto together can do something neither can
alone. The CCP/RMB pole runs a Chinese system that is already at scale, capable
of operating completely outside the dollar, and based on a more modern digital yuan

therefore Oceania had always been at war with Eurasia. The enemy of the moment always represented
absolute evil, and it followed that any past or future agreement with him was impossible.”

159
158                                                             CHAPTER 3. THE TRIPOLAR MOMENT



to boot. The BTC/web3 part of this aligns American dissidents18 with global crypto
holders, and promotes neutral protocols19 that take away American root access (but
also don’t grant it to China).


3.6.3 Intrapolar Conflicts

Near each pole there is an internal dyad representing the conflict within. We represent
this as an inscribed triangle within the tripolar triangle.

Near the NYT pole are the American dissidents, the non-woke liberals, centrists, and
conservatives who disagree with the US establishment’s platform of speech controls,
inflation, and unending warfare - but still identify as American first, and don’t want
to see China become number one.

Near the CCP pole are the Chinese liberals, the internationalist capitalists who thought
times were better under Hu, as well as the many groups left and right who’ve seen their
fortunes dim under newly aggressive Chinese nationalism. . . but, again, who still see
themselves as Chinese first, and don’t want to bend to American imperialism.

Near the BTC pole is the web3 community and the tens of millions of Bitcoin holders
who don’t identify as Maximalists. . . but who also still subscribe to many of the inter-
nationalist principles that presuppose an internet without American or Chinese root
control over the financial or communication systems.


3.6.4 The Road To Recentralization

And what about other countries and people who don’t define themselves with reference
to the Americans, the Chinese, or the blockchain? Well, there will be a lot of pressure
to identify with the first two poles. . . which will drive any group that doesn’t want to be
under the thumb of the US establishment or the CCP to the third pole of BTC/web3.

That is, one of our premises is that the Indians, Israelis, American dissidents, Chinese
liberals, tech founders/investors, and people from other countries that want to maintain
their own sovereignty will need to avail themselves of BTC/web3 for decentralized
communication, transaction, and computation.

But to fully explain why, we’ll need to go through a scenario for the future that isn’t
about remaining under the thumb of US or Chinese centralization, nor about falling
into crypto-anarchic decentralization, but rather about consciously recentralizing into
opt-in startup societies.





   18See Bitcoin is Civilization for the long-form argument on why American dissidents will line up
behind Bitcoin.
   19See Great Protocol Politics for a full article on why neutral protocols and national stacks will be
chosen by all countries that don’t want to be under American or Chinese control.

160
Chapter 4



Decentralization, Recentralization





4.1 The Possible Futures

It’s not about the future, it’s about the possible futures.

Why? Because causality exists. Because we can run controlled experiments. Because
human action can influence outcomes. Because we aren’t communists that believe
in the historical inevitability of utopian outcomes, but technologists that believe in
individual initiative subject to practical constraints.1

The previous two chapters were about those constraints, about the past and the im-
mediate present. They orient us to discuss several possible futures, before picking out
one trajectory to focus on - the one where we materialize many startup societies, get a
few diplomatically recognized as network states, and rebuild high-trust societies via a
recentralized center.

Some caveats before we begin, though.

When it comes to the past, every history is, inevitably, just a story.2 That is, any
tale of the past is necessarily abridged, abbreviated, edited, and idiosyncratic. You
can’t convey 5000 years of written records any other way. And our tale of History
as Trajectory is no different: it’s like the “why now” slide at the beginning of every
entrepreneur’s deck, a practical history3 of particular events that lead to the feasibility

    1See the section here on the Tech Tree model of history to reconcile the “great man” and “historical
inevitability” theories. The great man can steer the tech tree, but they can’t reinvent everything from
scratch.
    2While we’re not able to give a full treatment of history, you might want to check out something
like Will and Ariel Durant’s “The Lessons of History”.
    3It is of course partly tongue-in-cheek to cite the “why now” slide as a kind of history. But there’s a
deeper point: just as the culture of the merchant was on the periphery of feudalism, and then became
central to the whole thing as society transitioned from subsistence agriculture to industrial capitalism,
so too are we transitioning from the industrial age to a technological age driven by entrepreneurs and
investors. Tech culture, startup culture, and now BTC/web3 culture is becoming global culture. And
the modest “why now” slide is a little piece of that - it’s history for pragmatists, functional history,


                                                                     159

161
160                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



of the network state. But we cited our references, so you can check our facts.

On the topic of the present, our chapter on the Tripolar Moment is the section of the
book that is likely to be the most dated. Intentionally so, because we endeavored to
move most references to current or near-past events to this section.4 So, think of that
chapter as being very much a worldview circa mid-2022; like the Kalman filter, we
reserve the right to incorporate new information to update it.

Now to the subject of the future. As you’ll see we do believe a recentralized center
of pragmatic network states can emerge, and describe several scenarios where this
could happen. But our projections are just scenarios, and throughout we keep in mind
volatility, reflexivity, competing curves, and the consequent limits to predictability.

First, volatility is rising because the internet increases variance. Social media is social
volatility (go viral or get canceled), and cryptocurrency is financial volatility (go to
the moon or get rekt). Volatility makes correct predictions more difficult, but offers
upside for those who predict correctly. And volatility is good for insurgents and bad
for incumbents, because the former only need to get lucky once while the latter need
to keep staying lucky. It’s no longer just individuals that are subject to high volatility,
as entire countries can rise and fall overnight. So, in a high volatility environment,
only Bezos-style invariants remain constant. All other observations should be taken as
tentative — they are true until they are suddenly not.

Reflexivity is Soros’ term for the feedback loop between participants’ understanding
of a situation and the situation in which they participate. In systems made of human
beings, putting something out into the world results in a reaction, and then a reaction
to that reaction, and so on, often resulting in positive and negative feedback loops
rather than textbook convergence to equilibria. Thus, when collecting data on such
systems, let alone forecasting them, one must keep in mind that people will react to
predictions themselves, sometimes to make them come true. In social science, unlike
physical science, every row in a dataset represents a human being with a mind of their
own.

The concept of competing curves refers to the fact that there are many simultaneous
technopolitical movements competing at the present moment, different phenomena ris-
ing from zero to affect millions over the course of years, months, or even days. For
example, if you take a look at this graph of how people met their spouses, you can see
several different curves rising and falling as different cultural movements “come online,”

history with a point, history that is not (as Henry Ford once said) bunk.
    4I learned to do this the hard way — in 2013 I gave a series of lectures, where some bits held up
reasonably well, while others were very much time capsules from that era (GChat, anyone?). Benedict
Anderson’s otherwise excellent book Imagined Communities has the same issue, as it opens with a
reference to the conflict between Vietnam, Cambodia, and China as being a momentous event in the
history of nationalism, which it arguably was not5in retrospect.
 135As he describes, it was notable for a Marxist to see three newly independent, ostensibly communist
countries fighting with each other in the name of nationalism. He thought of nationalism as an illusion;
that was what led him to write the book.

162
4.1. THE POSSIBLE FUTURES                                                                           161


until the internet just dominates everything. Another example is the market share of
social networks over time; a third is Ray Dalio’s graph of the rise and fall of nations.

The point is that you can identify the players, but not always the outcome, in a complex
multiactor process. Applying this to our scenario analysis, we have some trends that
are synergistic and others that are antagonistic. For example, many trendlines point to
diminished American power, but at least one points in the other direction: the West’s
willingness to weaponize its tech giants for domestic and foreign conflicts alike. Does
this give American dominance another few years, another decade, or many more than
that? We can identify the curves but not always which ones win out.

Predictability has its limits. In our view there are two kinds of predictions that matter:
the physical and the financial. The physical prediction is a very specific bet on the
trajectory of a ball, on a genomic base call, or on the electron configuration of an
orbital. It’s checked by reproducible experiment, and your device fails if it fails. The
financial prediction is at the opposite end of the spectrum: it’s a macroscopic bet on
the volatile, reflexive behavior of other human beings. It’s checked by the unforgiving
market, and your fund fails if it fails.

We aren’t as interested in betting on manipulation-prone government statistics. Ac-
cording to the Chinese government of 2021, the number of COVID deaths in China
from mid 2020-2022 was zero. According to the San Francisco government of 2021,
the crime rate in SF was declining. According to the US establishment of 2021, the
inflation of the dollar was transitory. All this reminds us of the Soviet government of
1932, who said the harvest in Ukraine was glorious.

As we discuss later, it is useful to create on-chain shadow statistics that are more
verifiable, reliable, and censorship-resistant than these easily faked indicators. But
outside of that, predictions on official government statistics are otherwise uninteresting
because of how obviously political they are. So we steer clear of that kind of thing
— in our analysis of possible futures, we’ll either predict something is technologically
(and hence physically) feasible, or that it could result in a financial return, or both.
And we’ll give recipes for how to make those predictions reality, or prevent them from
becoming reality, in the form of fictional scenarios on good and bad futures.

So, to recap: our history is just a story, our analysis of the present may presently
be dated, and our forecasts for the future may be confounded by volatility, reflexivity,
competing curves, and the limits of predictability. With that said, all models are wrong,
but some are useful; so with caveats cataloged and provisos provided, let’s proceed!


4.1.1 Analytical Axes and Scenario Analyses

We start by describing new lenses to view the world in the sections on Sociopolitical
and Technoeconomic axes. These are mental models that hopefully help compress large
amounts of data into rough patterns.

Next, in the section on Foreseeable Futures, we put on our tech investor hats and

163
162                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



project out into the near future, describing developments we anticipate. These aren’t
just random investment theses, though; they’re pieces of the future that are relevant
to startup societies and network states.

We then game out one specific science fiction scenario in detail that we think is unfor-
tunately quite plausible: American Anarchy, Chinese Control, and the International
Intermediate. In this scenario, we project a Second American Civil War triggered in
part by a broke US government that attempts Bitcoin seizures, a situation we call
American Anarchy. Unlike the first Civil War, this would be a stochastic struggle be-
tween two Networks rather than an explicit dispute between two States. It would be
more undeclared than declared, more invisible than legible. And this conflict could end
in decentralization and disunion instead of centralization and consolidation. As radical
as that sounds, many thinkers from across the political spectrum already foresee some-
thing like this happening in different ways, including Stephen Marche, David Reaboi,
Barbara Walter, and Kurt Schlichter, though like me none of them are particularly
happy about the prospect.

Meanwhile, in this fictional scenario, the CCP implements an intense domestic crack-
down on the other side of the world to maintain stability, preventing Chinese people
from freely leaving the digital yuan network with their property, a result we refer
to as Chinese Control. As America descends into anarchy, the CCP points to their
functional-but-highly-unfree system as the only alternative, and exports a turnkey ver-
sion of their surveillance state to other countries as the next version of Belt and Road,
as a piece of “infrastructure” that comes complete with a SaaS subscription to China’s
all-seeing AI eye.

In the name of putting a lid on the anarchy and restoring “democracy”, the US es-
tablishment then silently copies CCP’s methodology without admitting they’re doing
so, much as they cloned China’s lockdown after loudly denouncing it. Similarly, after
spending a decade pretending to decry “surveillance capitalism”, the US establishment
formally deputizes many Big Tech companies as official arms of the surveillance state.
However, the establishment’s implementation of this digital lockdown is as tragicomic
as the CCP’s version is totalitarian, and is porous enough to permit serious resistance.


4.1.2 Strong Form and Weak Form Models of the Future

This is the world we could be barreling towards. You don’t have to believe in it to
found a startup society, though. So why talk about it at all then? Because in a high
volatility time, it’s worth thinking through models of how our future could be very
different from our present.6

    6For different views, you can Ray Dalio’s Principles for the Changing World Order, Barbara Walter
and Stephen Marche’s writings on a possible Second American Civil War, Peter Zeihan’s work, or David
Reaboi and Kurt Schlicter. All of them also think the current age will soon be giving way. Of them, I
agree with Dalio on about 70%, but he’s a bit more bullish on China than I am and doesn’t take BTC
or technology into account as a factor. I agree with Walter/Marche and Zeihan on perhaps only 20-
30%, but it’s worth reading them for the US establishment and heterodox neocon views respectively.

164
4.1. THE POSSIBLE FUTURES                                                                                       163



Think of the American-Anarchy-vs-Chinese-Control scenario as a strong form model
of how NYT, BTC, and CCP could collide, with startup societies and network states
arising out of that atom-smasher as deliberately created alternatives to Wokeness,
Maximalism, and Chinese Communism.

The weak form model is that things don’t work out precisely this way (few things do!),
but that the general trend is correct. That is, in the future the US Establishment
does lose relative control, the CCP does try to exert absolute control, and Bitcoin
Maximalists do advocate for no control. The way of life propounded by each of these
ideological communities will get extreme, but will also be itself justified as a reaction
to the other two perceived extremes, as discussed in Extremes and Counter-Extremes
Are Undesirable. So we’ll still need to build societies with consciously chosen tradeoffs
between submission, sympathy, and sovereignty, instead of unconsciously capitulating
to either an extreme or counter-extreme. And that again leads us to startup societies
and network states.

So, using the strong-form scenario as a base, we discuss a number of Victory Conditions
and Surprise Endings for different factions. We also give a bit more detail on the desired
outcome, the trajectory we want to shoot for: a Recentralized Center of high-trust
societies.


4.1.3 Building the Future Rather than Defaulting Into It

Our goal in thinking all this through is not pessimistic but pragmatic: to change
what we can change, by setting up a fourth pole as an alternative to the failing US
establishment, to maximalist crypto-anarchy, and to the centralized surveillance state
of the CCP.

We call the raw material for this fourth pole the International Intermediate. It in-
cludes American centrists, Chinese liberals, Indians, Israelis, web3 technologists, and
essentially everyone from around the world that wants to avoid both the American and
Chinese whirlpools.

At first blush, this group represents ~80% of the world population and has little in
common save their disinclination towards both anarchy and tyranny. But a subset of
them will be smart enough to realize that exit is a stopgap, not a solution. People tend
to imitate what they see, and if American Anarchy and Chinese Control are the most
prominent games in town they will eventually be imitated.

So isolationism is off the table. Yet so is direct intervention, as both the American and
Chinese theaters will snarl against any outside interference.

The answer then is innovation rather than isolationism or interventionism. A subset

I agree with Reaboi and Schlicter that conflict will arise, but think the form of that struggle will be
driven by international and technological factors to amuch greater extent than most US conservatives
currently appreciate, because the American theater is becoming the acted-upon, and not simply the
global actor.

165
164                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


of the International Intermediate needs to build something better than both American
Anarchy and Chinese Control, a concrete improvement over the propaganda, coercion,
surveillance, and conflict that may soon characterize the two pillars of the global econ-
omy.

In other words, the rest of the world will need to lead. They can’t hope for the US
establishment or CCP to figure it out. And that’s the Recentralized Center: a circle of
startup societies and network states built by pragmatic founders, a group of high-trust
communities architected as intentional alternatives to failed states and surveillance
states alike.


4.2 Sociopolitical Axes

Old mental models for understanding the world are quickly going out of date. Not
only are things changing faster, things are changing faster on new dimensions. New
sociopolitical axes are emerging. Seeing the world through old lenses risks being caught
blindsided by the political equivalent of a runaway truck. People who thought the
financial crisis of 2008 was unthinkable just weren’t looking at the right graphs. Michael
Burry was, though.

In the same spirit, what are some new graphs we could look at, new themes for conflict
and cooperation, new sociopolitical axes that are underestimated? That’s what this
section is about.


4.2.1 International Indians

I am moderately bullish on India, but extremely bullish on Indians.

Why? Well, first let’s talk about India the country. If you’re in the West, haven’t
been paying attention to India, and think it’s still just an uninteresting “Third World
country,” you can be forgiven for that. But take a look at the following links to orient:

      Here is a visual comparison of parts of Los Angeles vs India.

      Here’s a graph showing hundreds of millions of Indians getting cheap mobile
        internet service over the last five few years

      Here’s an amazing economic survey of India showing growth over the last decade

      Here’s a chart showing India is now #3 in tech unicorns after the US and China.

      Here’s a post that discusses the overall picture: The Internet Country

Putting that all together, there are now significant chunks of the “ascending world”
which are cleaner and better maintained than the “descending world” environments of
Los Angeles and San Francisco. That doesn’t mean the curves are the same — just
that they overlap in a way that would have been unthinkable a few decades ago.

166
4.2. SOCIOPOLITICAL AXES                                                                               165


Next, let’s talk about the Indian diaspora. There are about five million people of Indian
ancestry in the US, UK, Canada, and Australia, and a fair bit more if we include the full
South Asian diaspora. They have done quite well over the last few decades. While the
first generation came over with portable technical skills in medicine and engineering,
the second generation within the West speaks English without an accent and with
full cultural fluency - resulting in many Indians in law, filmmaking, and media. Some
have even ascended to the commanding heights of politics and technology, like Kamala
Harris, Sundar Pichai, and Satya Nadella.

That sets up an interesting State-plus-Network dynamic. Using our terminology, the
Indian State may take one step back for every two steps forward, even though it’s been
moving forward as of late. But the Network of the global Indian diaspora is just on
an exponential rise. Indeed, I think the 2020s will be for the Indian Network what the
2010s were for the Chinese State - somewhat ignored at the beginning of the decade,
but an important global force by the end of it.

Recall that “China had its first unicorn in 2010, and it took five years for it to get to
five unicorns; the year after that, it had twenty. Ecosystems develop very slowly, and
then all at once.”

Please don’t think of this as Indian triumphalism at all – I actually find it surprising!
It’s just recognition of an unexpected new player entering the arena that many still
underappreciate. For further context, you might read A New Idea of India or Our Time
Has Come.



4.2.2 Transhumanism Versus Anarcho-Primitivism

An important emerging political axis is transhumanism versus anarcho-primitivism.

Briefly, transhumanists think technology is good, and want to use technology to change
humanity in fundamental ways. Conversely, anarcho-primitivists think technology is
bad, and want to to return to the wild, de-industrialize, and abandon technology. They
think of humans as pollution on this great Earth.

There are right and left varieties of each, though they overlap. Left transhumanists like
Klaus Schwab of the World Economic Forum to some extent give rise to right anarcho-
primitivists, and vice versa. Basically, left transhumanists make changes to the human
body that rightists find aesthetically unappealing. Conversely, right transhumanists
advocate improvements to the human body that left anarcho-primitivists find terrifying.

It works in reverse as well. Some anarcho-primitivists advocate a back-to-the-land
kind of traditional masculinity that some transhumanists find constraining. And some
anarcho-primitivists want a Unabomber-like end to industrial civilization which would
(among other things!) destroy the supply chains needed for the life extension sought
by transhumanists.

167
166                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



4.2.3 The Identity Stack

An issue that confused me for a while is why criticism of San Francisco seemed to anger
some people irrationally. Couldn’t they also see that prices and feces were both up and
to the right at the same time? Eventually what I realized is that everyone is patriotic
about something, and those people were patriotic about their city, while others were
patriotic about their countries, companies, or even their cryptocurrencies.

To elaborate on this point, for someone who identifies themselves as a San Franciscan,
criticism of the city is taken personally, because that isn’t a swappable piece of their
life. Their company? That’s just a job, it’s replaceable, what they really care about is
the Golden Gate Bridge, the Presidio, the 49ers - a sort of romantic identification with
the city itself, and many of the people that live there.

Others affiliate with their national identity first, above their city identity - they’ll move
between military bases at the drop of a hat, which are interchangeable, but they are
willing to kill and die for the flag with which they identify. Or they might be “based”
out of Seattle for a time, signifying that their location is immaterial, while signaling
their deep love for democracy online, an identity that is non-negotiable.

Still others are patriotic about their companies, those things they’ve founded and
funded, breathed life into, those entities that took all their capital and intellect to
build, which are always far more fragile than they look from the outside, and which
some callous outsider could break for likes with a few morale-draining tweets.

And yet others characterize themselves by their cryptocurrencies, thinking of them-
selves first and foremost as Bitcoiners or Ethereans. These folks are often digital
nomads, indifferent as to whether they see the sunset in San Francisco or Singapore, or
what crypto exchange lives or dies, so long as they can check in with their community
of holders each day.

In each case, there’s typically a large economic, social, or political stake in the thing
people are identifying with. The city patriot may be a homeowner or otherwise invested
in city governance. The country patriot may have signed a military contract. The
company patriot may be a founder or early employee with a significant equity stake.
And the cryptocurrency patriot is often a sizeable holder of coins.

Now, not all things are like this; people can be right-handed without identifying them-
selves as right handers, they can do something without being something. So top-level
identity, primary identity - that’s precious, it’s rare, it’s the identity that supersedes all
others. People might use seven daily apps but they have even fewer primary identities
- usually only one.

Primary identities need not just be about city, country, company, or cryptocurrency.
They can be related to religion, ethnicity, or professions like “journalist” and “professor”.
There’s a huge up-front sacrifice required to become a tenured professor, or to publicly
convert to a new religion, and for this reason such primary identities often make it to
the fore of someone’s Twitter bio.

168
4.3. TECHNOECONOMIC AXES                                                                          167



Example: Twitter Bios


















Here’s a concrete example of the identity stack, with three Twitter bios:

      Jim: #HereWeGo #SteelerNation —All Things PA —Father — Husband —
        #Christian — #ArmyVet

      Billy: Immutable money, infinite frontier, eternal life. #Bitcoin

      Bob: Army retired, anti-terrorist assistance program, husband, father, grandfa-
        ther, Iraq vet, educator, but most importantly an AMERICAN!

Again, everybody is patriotic about something. Jim loves his city; Billy is patriotic
about technology and transhumanism; Bob would fight for the American flag.

The collection of all that defines someone, in rank order, is their identity stack. The top
of the identity stack is the primary identity: the Pittsburgh Steelers for Jim, Bitcoin
for Billy, and America for Bob.

And, as noted, primary identity is precious. It’s the identity that supersedes all others.
To build anything great – a company, a currency, a civilization – an affiliation must
beat out the rest of the identity stack to become someone’s primary identity. That’s a
high bar to meet.


4.3 Technoeconomic Axes


4.3.1 The Internet Increases Variance

The internet increases variance. Digitization allows situations to be taken to their
logical conclusion, instantly, even when that digital logic doesn’t quite work in physical
reality. This means things can flip from zero to one, without warning. An overnight
success, ten seconds in the making. The only certainty is rising volatility.

169
168                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



First, the observation: over the last 20 years, we’ve gone from 30 minute sitcoms to
30 second clips and 30 episode Netflix binges. From a stable 9-5 job to a gig economy
task or a crypto windfall. From a standard life script to 30 year olds living with their
parents and 20 year old startup CEOs.

This is a very general phenomenon. You see it in the dashboard of every internet
disruptor. With Uber, for example, relative to the time of a standard taxi ride, some
Uber trips are much longer and others much shorter.

Why is this happening? Because the internet connects people peer-to-peer. It disinter-
mediates. In doing this it removes the middleman, the mediator, the moderator, and
the mediocrity. Of course, each of those words has a different connotation. People are
happy to see the middleman and mediocrity go, but they don’t necessarily want to see
the moderator and mediator disappear.

Nevertheless, at least at first, when the internet enters an arena, once the Network
Leviathan rears its head, this is what happens. Nodes that had never met before,
could never have met before, now connect peer-to-peer. They can form something
terrible like a Twitter mob, or they can form something amazing like ETH Research.
You get extreme downside and extreme upside.7

One analogy is to a centrifuge. If you take a sample of biological fluid from your body
and centrifuge it, you’ll see a bunch of layers that were previously mixed together. Then
they all get separated out. That’s what the internet is doing to society, to institutions.
It’s just centrifuging it into its constituent parts, whether that be albums separated
into songs or newspapers disaggregated into articles.

That’s the unbundling. Then comes the rebundling. The songs get grouped into
playlists, the articles grouped into Twitter feeds. This step too is profitable; it’s not
the same as what came before, it’s a v3, it’s a flexible bundle. It’s the helical theory of
history, where from one standpoint we’ve come full circle (“rebundling into an album-
like playlist”) but from another axis we’ve made amazing progress (“anyone can play
any individual song and create whatever playlist they want”).

With that said, that rebundling is still higher variance than the pre-internet bundles
that preceded them. There are millions more playlists than albums, millions more
Twitter feeds than newspapers.


BlueAnon, QAnon, SatoshiAnon

As the internet increases variance, we see more upside and more downside in everything.

Technologists focus on the upside, because the gain from the wins (like search engines,
smartphones, social networks, and artificial intelligence) should compound while the
losses should be one-offs. That is, once you find a winning formula, or a rebundling, you

    7Another example is Bitcoin. It’s the Unix of money. You can send millions with a keystroke or
rm your entire fortune. That’s more upside and more downside, by making people power users, and
taking away the system administrator.

170
4.3. TECHNOECONOMIC AXES                                                                                     169



can cheaply scale it across the rest of the network relatively quickly. So, this probably
should lead to more net upside over time, just like every past technological revolution
has. I think we’re already way in the black with the internet (almost every piece of
information ever in billions of people’s hands for free at any time, for starters), but it
depends on your metric.

Conversely, the establishment can only see the downside outcomes. That is, the
BlueAnons can only see the QAnons who are worse than median, not the Satoshi-
Anons who are far better than median. It’s a bit like Paul Graham’s concept of the
Blub programmer. Just like the Blub programmer can look down to see incompe-
tence, but can’t look up to see brilliance, the establishmentarian can’t comprehend the
upwards deviations of the internet. They think it’s just weird.

Just like Hollywood once compared Netflix to the Albanian Army, the US establishment
doesn’t yet understand how much better Satoshi Nakamoto or Vitalik Buterin is than
every apparatchik they have in the Federal Reserve system. And they don’t understand
that upward deviation is creating a more competent group of global leaders than the
American establishment, a more meritocratically selected group than the nepotists of
the East Coast.

Just as it allowed Satoshi to rise.


Social Media is American Glasnost, Cryptocurrency is American Pere-
stroika

There are two particular ways that the internet increases variance worth noting: social
media and digital currency.

      Social media increases social volatility. You can go viral or get canceled, experi-
         encing large overnight gains8 or losses in status.

      Digital currency increases financial volatility. You can go to the moon or “get
         rekt,” experiencing large overnight gains or losses in financial status.

There’s a parallel in history for this: glasnost and perestroika. Mikhail Gorbachev, the
last Soviet leader, thought he could reform Soviet society by allowing more free speech
(via glasnost) and free markets (via perestroika). He didn’t quite understand what he
was in for. The resultant instability helped bring down the Soviet Union.

Similarly, social media is like American glasnost and cryptocurrency is American per-
estroika. Just as Gorbachev unleashed free speech and free market reforms because he
believed communism could be reformed, the US establishment actually bought their
own narrative in the 1990s and 2000s about their ostensibly free and democratic soci-
ety. Only now are they realizing that the many speech and thought controls that their
predecessors had set up and hidden in plain sight - like stringent regulations and high

    8Financial status (money) is more measurable than social status, because your bank account balance
is objectively measurable. But social status has become fairly measurable too, via likes, retweets,
followers, replies, and backlinks.

171
170                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


capital requirements for broadcast content production - was actually the key to their
continued power.

Now that it’s clear that the Internet is to the USA what the USA was to the USSR, that
it’s truly free speech and free markets, they are trying to tamp down the American
Spring they’ve unleashed, but it may be too late. Obama was in a sense arguably
America’s Gorbachev, as he allowed technology to grow mostly unimpeded from 2008-
2016, to billions of users, without fully realizing what would ensue.


The 100-Year Information Tsunami

Few institutions that predated the internet will survive the internet.

Why? Because the internet increases variance, it causes huge surges of digital pressure
on older institutions that just weren’t built for it. They can’t handle the peak levels
of social and financial stress that the internet can unleash. They’re like seaside towns
that weren’t built for a thousand year flood. Michael Solana’s post JUMP is quite good
on this topic.

Indeed, this is a good analogy, because one of the ways to think about the internet is as
a carrier of massive information waves. Most normal waves propagate in physical space
–– the standard partial differential equations (PDEs) are 1-, 2-, or 3-dimensional (e.g.
longitudinal waves like a slinky, transverse like electromagnetic waves, or earthquake-
style spherical waves). But these information waves propagate on highly dynamic social
networks where the topology9 of connection & disconnection changes quite a bit.


4.3.2 Naturally Physical to Natively Digital

The digital is primary and the physical is now secondary.


Three Phase Transition

The digital transition happens in three phases: there’s the physical version, the inter-
mediate form, and then the internet-native version. If you’re into electrical engineering,
you can think of this as analog, to analog/digital, to natively digital.

      One example is the transition from a piece of paper, to a scanner which scans
        that file into a digital version, to a natively digital text file which begins life on
        the computer and is only printed out when it needs to be.

      Another example is the transition from face-to-face meetings, to Zoom video
        (which is a scanner of faces), to natively digital VR meetings.

      Yet another example: physical cash, to something like PayPal or fintech (which is
        just a scan of the pre-existing banking system), to the truly native digital version
        of money: cryptocurrency.

    9You might still be able to visualize it if you embed the underlying graph into a manifold of some
kind and then think of the wave as propagating on that.

172
4.3. TECHNOECONOMIC AXES                                                                          171


Once you see this pattern you can see it everywhere, and you can look for those spaces
where we’re still stuck at the v2, at the scanned version, where we’ve taken the oine
experience and put it online, but not fundamentally innovated.


Truly Digital News: Dashboards, On-Chain Event Feeds

Newspapers are actually only partially digitized. In 1996, the primary version of The
New York Times was the physical paper and the mirror was the website. Then, grad-
ually, more and more weight got shifted to the digital version. Now it can fairly be
said that the physical paper is just a printout of the website, a snapshot at a particular
time. And there are online-only features like interactive graphics that are impossible
to replicate in the physical paper. Most importantly, the comments section is really
social media, particularly Twitter, where all the reporters are located.

But this is still really just a newspaper, put online. Most of it can be printed out.
What’s the next step in this evolution? What does natively digital news look like?
There are at least two concepts of interest here: morning dashboards replacing the
morning newspaper, and cryptographically verifiable event feeds replacing tweets of
unverifiable content.

Dashboards > newspapers. If you are in tech, the first thing you look at each day
may be a personal or company dashboard, like your fitbit or your sales. This is good.
The first thing you look at each day shouldn’t be random stories someone else picked.
Should be carefully selected metrics you want to improve. This is a good vector of
attack to definitionally disrupt newspapers.

If we think about it from Clayton Christensen’s “jobs to be done” perspective, news-
papers have this incredible pride-of-place — first thing you look at in the morning! —
but typically do not add enough value to deserve that position.

On-chain event feeds > Twitter > newspapers. One key observation is that just as many
sports articles are digest of box scores, and many financial articles are summaries of the
day’s stock action, so too are many political and tech articles merely wrappers around
tweets.

Because news breaks on Twitter. So, eventually, the next kind of newspaper will look
something like a cryptographically verified version of Twitter. The first draft of history
will be the raw on-chain event feed, written directly to the ledger of record by billions
of writers and sensors around the world.

In other words, truly digital newspapers will be on-chain event feeds. Digitally signed
crypto oracles, not corporations.


Remote Work to Remote Life

My friend Daniel Gross remarked that 2020 will be seen by future historians as the
year when the internet age truly began.

173
172                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


The lasting impact of COVID-19 is that it flipped the world from physical to digital
first. Because the internet in 2000 or 2010 couldn’t bear the load of the entire physical
world. But by 2020, it kind of could. Now it’s not just about remote work, but remote
life.

During the pandemic, every sector that had previously been socially resistant to the
internet (healthcare, education, law, finance, government itself) capitulated. Those
aspects of society that had been very gradually changing with technology shifted
overnight. For example, the convention of politeness shifted: now it was rude to ask
for an in-person business meeting, as you’d do it remote if at all possible.

With vaccination, many of these things have flipped back, but they won’t come back
all the way. Digitization was permanently accelerated.

It used to be that the physical world was primary, and the internet was the mirror.
Now that has flipped. The digital world is primary and the physical world is just the
mirror. We’re still physical beings, of course. But important events happen on the
internet first and then materialize in the physical world later, if ever.


From Printing to Materializing

All value eventually becomes digital, because we are generalizing the concept of “print-
ing” from inking a piece of paper to actually materializing digital things in the physical
world. This is counterintuitive, and you’ll have objections. But let’s get there in a few
steps.

    1. Much value creation is already digital. If you’re reading this, you’re probably
        an information worker. You may not have thought about it this way, but the
        majority of your waking hours are probably spent in front of one screen or another
        — a laptop for work, a phone on the go, a tablet for reading, and so on. So,
        most of your life is already spent in the Matrix, in a sense, even before the
        advent of widespread AR/VR. Short of a pullback to an Amish or Andaman
        Islander existence, most of your life is and will be digitally influenced in some
        form. Moreover, much of the value in the physical world comes from blueprints
        created on a computer in some form; eg, the iPhones manufactured in Shenzhen
        gain much of their value from the designers in California. So, a good fraction of
        value creation is largely digital.

    2. More value creation is becoming digital. Read Packy McCormick’s article on
        “The Great Online Game,” and think about every information worker essentially
        pressing buttons to earn cryptocurrency in a giant globalized internet economy.
        That’s what 2030 or 2035 is on track to look like.

    3. Much spending is already digital. Think about what fraction of your spending
        already goes to digital goods like books, music, software-as-a-service, and the
        like. Now think about what fraction of the remainder goes through a digital
        interface of some kind, whether through an ecommerce website like Amazon or a

174
4.3. TECHNOECONOMIC AXES                                                                          173


        point-of-sale terminal via Apple Pay. So, it’s already fairly uncommon for people
        in industrialized societies to do a fully oine purely physical transaction, which
        might be conceptualized as “hand a five dollar bill over at a farmer’s market for
        several tomatos.”

    4. Many actions can be analogized to printing. Now take this one step further and
        think about the remaining oine components as “printing” something out, though
        you can use the word “materializing” if it suits. You hit a button on Amazon and a
        complicated multijurisdictional delivery process ensues, resulting in a box landing
        at your front door. You hit a button on Uber and a car arrives. You hit a button
        on Doordash and food arrives. You hit a button to rent an Airbnb, and then
        another to open the smart lock, and the door to housing opens. You can do the
        same for the door to your coworking space office, or the door to your electric car.
        So, more and more of the goods people prize in the physical world are in a sense
        “printed” out.

    5. Many printing actions can be fully automated. Today, there’s a human in the loop
        for things like food delivery. But as robotics improves, this could in theory become
        a completely electromechanical process, just like printing. Every individual step
        from the farm to table could be automated. As this visual shows, there are
        already robots for each step: robots in the fertilizer factories, for harvesting, and
        for last-mile delivery. As an exercise, it’d be useful to a full stack example where
        someone “prints” out an apple and it’s fully robotically grown and delivered, even
        if in practice you’d have stockpiles of apples rather than (slowly!) growing them
        on demand.

So, if you put all that together, all value is digital. Everything starts on the computer,
generates cryptocurrency, and can be used either to buy digital goods or to pay robots
to materialize things in the physical world.

Humans will still exist, of course, but the economy will become the cryptoeconomy.
All value goes digital.


4.3.3 The Productivity Mystery

What is the productivity mystery? Well, we really should be in the middle of a golden
age of productivity. Within living memory, computers did not exist. Photocopiers did
not exist. Even backspace did not exist. You had to type it all by hand.

It wasn’t that long ago that you couldn’t search all your documents, sort them, back
them up, look things up, copy/paste things, email things, change fonts of things, or
undo things. Instead, you had to type it all on a typewriter!

If you’re doing information work, relative to your ancestors who worked with papyrus,
paper, or typewriter, you are a golden god surfing on a sea of electrons. You can make
things happen in seconds that would have taken them weeks, if they could do them at
all.

175
174                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



We should also be far more productive in the physical world. After all, our predeces-
sors built railroads, skyscrapers, airplanes, and automobiles without computers or the
internet. And built them fast. Using just typewriters, slide rules, & safety margins.

This is a corollary to the Thiel/Cowen/Hall concept of the Great Stagnation. Where
has all that extra productivity gone? It doesn’t appear manifest in the physical world,
for sure, though you can argue it is there in the internet world. There are a few possible
theses.

    1. The Great Distraction. All the productivity we gained has been frittered away
         on equal-and-opposite distractions like social media and games.

    2. The Great Dissipation. The productivity has been dissipated on things like forms,
         compliance, and process.

    3. The Great Divergence. The productivity is here, it’s just only harnessed by the
         indistractable few. The founders of tech unicorns, for example, may have more
         ability to focus online than most.

    4. The Great Dilemma. The productivity has been burned in bizarre ways that
         require line-by-line “profiling” of everything, like this tunnel study.

    5. The Great Dumbness. The productivity is here, but we’ve just made dumb deci-
         sions in the West while others have harnessed it. See for example China building
         a train station in nine hours vs taking 100-1000X10 that long to upgrade a Cal-
         train stop. Now, yes, I’m sure not every train station in China is built in nine
         hours, and wouldn’t be surprised if some regions in the US (or the West more
         broadly) do better than SFBA. But feels likely that a systematic study would
         find a qualitative speed gap, 10-100X or more.

    6. The Great Delay. The productivity will be here, but is delayed till the arrival of
         robotics. That is, for things we can do completely on the computer, productivity
         has measurably accelerated. It is 100X faster to email something than to mail
         it. But a slow human still needs to act on it. So, in this hypothesis, humans are
         now the limiting factor.

         Essentially, representing a complex project on disk in something like Google Docs
         may not be the productivity win we think it is. Humans still need to comprehend
         all those electronic documents to build the thing in real life.

         So the problem may be in the analog/digital interface. Do we need to actuate
         as fast as we compute? That would mean zero-delay robotic task completion
         will be the true productivity unlock. And that we haven’t gone full digital yet.
         So long as humans are still in the loop, we won’t get the full benefits of digital
         productivity.

   10100-1000X is not an exaggeration. A Caltrain station improvement lasted from November 2017
to fall 2020, which is about 3 years. Three years vs nine hours is (3 * 365 * 24)/9 = 2920, which
means the US needs almost 3000X as long to upgrade a train station as China does to build one from
scratch.

176
4.3. TECHNOECONOMIC AXES                                                                          175


I don’t know the answer, but I think the line-by-line profiling approach used on the
tunnels is a good but slow way to find out exactly what went wrong, while the approach
of looking at other countries and time periods – namely, studying history – could
actually be the fast way of figuring out what might be right.



4.3.4 Linguistic Borders of the Internet

If the organic borders of the physical world are rivers and mountain ranges, the organic
borders of the internet are software incompatibilities and language barriers.

The first of these is obvious: Facebook’s ecosystem is distinct from Google’s is distinct
from Ethereum’s, because the backends don’t fully overlap, because they’re incompat-
ible at the software level.

The second is a bit less obvious. You can imagine the internet being cut up into
continental-scale pieces, with the English-language internet being the largest with bil-
lions of people, the Chinese-language internet being the second largest with 1.3 billion,
and so on for the Spanish-language, Japanese-language, Korean-language, Russian-
language internets.

One huge difference between the English internet and Chinese internet is that the
former is global and arguably decentralized while the latter is heavily concentrated in
China with the CCP maintaining root control over most key nodes.

Another important consequence is that the English internet is about to admit a billion
new users in the form of all the Indians who are newly coming online. And because the
Indian internet becomes a much bigger part of the English-language discourse, it will
be difficult for the US establishment to censor the English-language internet as much
as they want to, because hosting can be based in the sovereign country of India.



4.3.5 Network Defects

A network defect is when increasing the size beyond a certain point decreases the value
of the network. Metcalfe’s law doesn’t include this dynamic as utility is projected to just
increase to infinity as network size grows, but there are a few different mathematical
models that predict this outcome, such as congestion-based models or this post by
Vitalik.

Repulsion within a network is a key dynamic that can lead to network defect. The idea
is that two or more subgroups within a network have such conflict that it reduces the
global value of the network for both, until one of them defects to another network. So
it’s a network “defect” in both senses of the term: a failure and a political defection.

177
176                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



4.4 Foreseeable Futures


4.4.1 AR Glasses Bridge Physical and Digital Worlds

Augmented reality (AR) glasses may be the most foreseeable invention of all time.

In the 90s and 2000s, people talked about the convergence device. Gates imagined it
would be a smart television, but it turned out to be the iPhone. What’s the next
convergence device? I think it’s AR glasses. Take the following technologies:

      Snapchat’s Spectacles

      Facebook’s Oculus Quest

      Google Glass Enterprise

      Apple’s AR Kit

      Augmented reality apps like Pokemon Go

If you put all those together, you get a vision of augmented reality glasses that give
you instant-on access to the digital world in your field of view, and perhaps darken
with another touch to give you virtual reality. Anyone can teleport into or out of your
field of vision with your consent, you can “right click” on any object to get AI-informed
metadata on it, and you can get computer-guided instructions to execute almost any
physical procedure from repairing a machine to sewing.

We know that millions of people manage to wear glasses all day, and they’re lighter
than headsets and easy to take on and off. So these may become as ubiquitous as
phones. It will be an engineering marvel to get there, of course, and while Apple is a
strong contender Facebook may be the most likely company to be able to ship them
given its progress with Oculus and founder-led innovation.

Why will AR glasses be so big? If you think about how much of your life is spent
looking at a screen, whether it’s a laptop or a phone or a watch, >50% of your waking
hours is already spent in the matrix. AR glasses would reduce “screen” time in one
sense, freeing you up to compute on the go without looking at a screen per se, but
increase digital time in another sense, as people would constantly have these HUDs
active to see the world.

This means even more of our daily experience will blend not just the physical world
dominated by natural law, but the digital world run by human-written code. The oine
world still exists, physics and biology still exist, but algorithms and databases run even
more of human existence. The Network surrounds us to an even greater extent than
the State did.

If combined with some kind of gesture interface (gloves, rings, or perhaps just sophis-
ticated motion tracking), you might be able to use your hands to do anything in the
digital realm. So, with AR glasses, the digital and physical realms fully blend, and
people would actually be able to see and interact with an open metaverse in real life.

178
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE177



4.4.2 Experimental Macroeconomics

Cryptoeconomics is transforming macroeconomics into an experimental subject.

Why? Because you can actually issue a currency, set a monetary policy, get opt-in
participants, and test your theories in practice. The proof is in the pudding. And, if
successful, the pudding is worth many billions of dollars.

This refutes the premise that economics and business are wholly disjoint. They aren’t
disjoint at all. Microeconomics is the theory of individuals and firms, which is directly
related to running a business. Each price you set, each company you start, is a kind of
microeconomic experiment (albeit usually a poorly-controlled one).

Macroeconomics, by contrast, until recently was off-limits to experiment. A first step
forward was MIT’s Edward Castronova early work on virtual economies like World of
Warcraft. Now anyone can create a cryptocurrency, set monetary policy, and see what
happens.

Perhaps the closest thing to experimental macroeconomics prior to cryptocurrency was
the experience of setting up & scaling massive two-sided marketplaces like Airbnb,
eBay, Google Ads, etc.

You quickly learn that ideology is a poor guide. Naive libertarianism and progressivism
both fail. Why? Basically, people want to make money on those platforms. They
absolutely do respond to incentives, unlike the naive progressive model that it’ll all
be altruistic behavior. But the marketplace operator has immense power to shape
incentives for good or ill. So the naive libertarian belief in a fully decentralized Hayekian
order does not always come about.


4.5 American Anarchy, Chinese Control, Interna-

             tional Intermediate

Here we give a bit more detail on a sci-fi scenario11 in which the US descends into a
chaotic Second American Civil War, the CCP responds with the opposite extreme of
a total surveillance state that traps wealth in its digital yuan network, and the rest of
the world - if we’re lucky - builds a stable alternative of opt-in startup societies that
peacefully rejects these extremes.

To be clear, you don’t need to believe in this scenario to build startup societies and
network states. But it’s a mental model for the future, which we present for the same
reason that Ray Dalio put out a (somewhat euphemistic) model of how the US order

   11What’s my level of confidence in this? About what it was in my 2013 talk on Silicon Valley’s
Ultimate Exit. I think that talk holds up reasonably well, but as per Soros’ reflexivity the trends I
identified at the time gave rise to counter trends which were not yet observable, like the turnaround
of Microsoft by Satya Nadella, the rise of Trump, and the web3 movement as an alternative to US
and Chinese tech companies alike.

179
178                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



could fall to an external competitor, and Peter Turchin put out a (less euphemistic)
model of how the US could fall into internal disorder.


4.5.1 American Anarchy

Prosperity, Tyranny, or Anarchy?

The progressive vision is that the West is getting more free, equal, and prosperous.12
The dystopian vision is that we’re actually in the incipient stages of tyranny, whether
that be fascist or woke respectively. What’s under-theorized is a third possibility:
namely that, in the US at least, the inconclusive power struggle between Democrats
and Republicans means America is headed for anarchy.

As the events of 2021 unfolded, it became clear that even with unified control of the
federal government, the Democrats were no more effective than the Republicans had
been with comparable power four years earlier. Neither faction proved capable of
implementing the total top-down domination that some in their party advocated and
many in the other party feared.

Meanwhile, the non-partisan state-capacity of the US as a whole continued to visibly
decay. Squint past the pandemic’s half-ignored, TSA-like COVID regulations and you
saw a half-ignored, TSA-like COVID regulator – namely, a failing state that people did
half-ignore, and arguably had to half-ignore, because the USA itself was now the TSA,
and the TSA, they knew, was safety theater.

Today, in the territory governed by this inept bureaucracy, we now see power outages,
supply-chain shortages, rampant flooding, and uncontrolled fires. We see riots, arsons,
shootings, stabbings, robberies, and murders. We see digital mobs that become physical
mobs. We see a complete loss of trust in institutions from the state to the media. We
see anti-capitalism and anti-rationalism. We see states breaking away from the US
federal government, at home and abroad. And we see the End of Power, the Revolt of
the Public, the defeat of the military, the inflation of the dollar, and - looming ahead
- an American anarchy.

What’s coming isn’t fascism or communism, like the left-wing and right-wing pundits
would have us believe, even though they don’t believe it themselves. What’s coming is
the exact opposite of that, a world where the civilized concepts of freedom and equity
are extrapolated to their decivilizational limit, where you ain’t the boss of me and we
are all equal, where all hierarchy is illegitimate and with it all authority, where no one
is in charge and everything is in chaos.

   12On a long enough timescale, this is arguably true. See the many graphs from Hans Rosling and
Steven Pinker to this effect. Still, civilizational collapse does occur, and as everyone from Elon Musk
to Matt Ridley will tell you, things like Moore’s law don’t happen by accident - people need to drive
those innovations to keep us moving forward in time. As an antidote for anti-empirical doomerism,
I’m all in favor of Rosling and Pinker, and indeed recommend their work. But we need to also avoid
anti-empirical nonchalance. Thiel’s determinate optimism is better than the belief that someone else
will take care of it.

180
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE179


We can argue this may be preferable to the status quo, in the same way some think
the chaotic Russia of the 1990s was on balance better than the authoritarian Soviet
Union of the 1980s. We can argue it may be inevitable; as the Chinese proverb goes,
“the empire, long divided, must unite; long united, must divide.” And we can argue
that this transitional period of anarchy may be lamentable, but that it’s better than
the other team being in charge, and that we can build a better order on the other side.
Maybe so, and that’s what this book is about. But prior to any rebundling, I think
we’re on track for quite the unbundling.


Maximalist vs Woke

With that poetic introduction over, let’s get down to specifics. Rather than seeing
an indefinite continuation of the postwar order, or the long Second Cold War between
the US and China that many are preparing for, the US may be on track to descend
into an American Anarchy, a chaotic Second American Civil War between the US
Establishment and its people.

We foresee two main factions. The first will align around the US federal govern-
ment, NYT/establishment media, wokeness, the dollar, and the Democrat party; they’ll
say they’re fighting for “democracy” against “insurrectionists.” The second will align
around state governments, decentralized media, maximalism, Bitcoin, and the Repub-
lican party; they’ll say they’re fighting for “freedom” against fiat “tyranny.” We can’t
predict their names, but rather than Democrat Blue and Republican Red, let’s call
them Wokes and Maximalists, or (more neutrally) Dollar Green and Bitcoin Orange.

Crucially, in this scenario, many non-whites will switch sides from Democrat Blue to
Bitcoin Orange, because whether black, white, Latino, or Asian, everyone’s savings
will be crushed by inflation. Many tech founders and independent writers will also go
Orange; tools like Square Cash will facilitate mass exodus to Bitcoin, and newsletter
writers will put out narratives that contest establishment media.

Conversely, many institutional loyalists will flip from Republican Red to Dollar Green,
including the police, military, and neoconservatives, simply because they are in the
final analysis the kind of team players and “natural conservatives” who would have
fought for both Tsarist Russia and the Soviet Union. My country, right or wrong.

The role of centralized tech companies will be key. By default they’ll swing to the
Dollar Green side, but many tech founders will lean Bitcoin Orange, so we could see
centralized tech companies supporting both sides — with older and fully wokified firms
like Google firmly on the Green side, and newer founder-controlled firms located in
places like Miami and Texas trending Orange.


How America Builds Towards Conflict

How could something as radical as a Second American Civil War happen? You could
write a book on this, and several people have, but in lieu of that we’ll give a bullet
pointed list. Before reviewing it, you might want to re-read Ray Dalio, Peter Turchin,

181
180                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



and Strauss & Howe if you want more context, as we won’t be able to recapitulate
every citation that informs this projection. Done? OK, here we go.

    1. Political polarization is way up. All the graphs show this now. The US is not
         really a “nation state” any more, but a binational country comprised of two war-
         ring ethnic groups that disagree on fundamental moral premises. It is about “god,
         gays, and guns”, but it’s also also about censorship, surveillance, and inflation.

    2. State capacity is way down. The competent America of mid-century, the left/right
         fusion that FDR put together, the America that combined a powerful centralized
         state with social conservatism, the America depicted in countless movies, the
         America that won World War Two and the Cold War — that country is over.
         This US government can’t build a bathroom in San Francisco, let alone a cost-
         effective fighter jet, destroyer, combat ship, or aircraft carrier.

    3. Economic prosperity is declining. All the political infighting of the last decade
         happened during a period of relative prosperity, even if it was based on the
         artificial expedient of printing money. But now that we face potentially years of
         inflation and stagnation, unhappiness will increase. Already you’re seeing articles
         coming trying to acclimatize people to lower standards of living, to “eat bugs and
         live in a pod.” And Turchin’s cliodynamical graphs put numbers to these feelings.

    4. Envy is increasing. This is normally phrased in terms of “inequality”, and that is
         indeed one way to look at it, but let’s rotate it by a few degrees and talk about
         envy. The return of great fortunes, the rise of social media, and the decline in
         religion has led to escalating envy. Every day, people can see others online who
         appear to be better off than they are, and who appear to be rising while they are
         falling. Whether that rise is real or not, whether it is due to the other person’s
         own efforts or not – it doesn’t really matter to the person who feels they aren’t
         getting ahead, who feels they are falling behind.

         Without a rising tide that lifts all boats, the “rational” act for some is to sink the
         other boats, to pull escaping crabs down into the bucket. Why? Because misery
         loves company, and because stopping someone from getting too far ahead means
         they can’t outcompete you for houses or mates. The only way out of this negative-
         sum trap is to build provably positive-sum systems and high-trust societies. But
         that’s exactly what the US establishment is not doing.13 It’s fomenting hatred
         on social media every day, and giving new reasons not to trust it — whether that
         be the insistent assurance that inflation is transitory or all the other episodes of
         official misinformation.

    5. Foreign military defeat looms. Leaving aside your feelings about the pandemic,

   13It’s also not what the Maximalists or the CCP offer. The Maximalist interprets Bitcoin’s trust-
minimization to mean that no one should be trusted, rather than thinking of Bitcoin as away to choose
whom to trust, as a tool to rebuild a high-trust society. And the CCP, like the US establishment,
doesn’t really give a convincing message to the world at large on why it should be trusted, instead
pushing a top-down message of loyalty through coercion.

182
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE181



         the military propaganda beforehand is worth reviewing. In 2018, the US De-
         partment of Defense put out press releases on its preparation for a pandemic, on
         its sophisticated vaccines. . . and then nothing happened. This was the first time
         many in the public had the opportunity to directly compare statements about
         “secret military programs” to the actual results, just as you might compare pro-
         jections by corporate executives to the actual results. And the size of that gap
         was remarkable. It indicated that at least some of the US military was just words,
         and not real.

         I remarked on this in early 2021, months before the defeat in Afghanistan gave
         yet another example of the gap between US military rhetoric and reality, where
         Kabul wasn’t going to fall in a few days and then it did.

         As of this writing, we’re four months into the Russo-Ukrainian war of 2022.
         After an initial surge of attention, global interest in the conflict has dropped off
         a cliff. The New York Times and other establishment media outlets have now
         instructed the US administration to pursue peace, and various reports indicate
         that the Ukrainians are quickly plowing through ammunition stockpiles while the
         Russians are gaining ground with long-range artillery. To be clear, it’s not at all
         obvious what will happen - there’s fog of war with everything - but in the event
         of an outright Russian victory, defined as gaining territory they didn’t have prior
         to the war, that wouldn’t augur well for the US establishment.

    6. US states are pulling away from the feds. There’s enormous coverage of US poli-
         tics at the national level, because it attracts clicks from all over. But local politics
         doesn’t get the same attention. However, if you’ve been paying attention, there
         has been a multi-decadal trend wherein states have been pulling away from the
         federal government and each other on matters like guns, immigration, abortion,
         gambling, marijuana, and other matters. This is part of the Future is Our Past
         thesis: it’s reversing the de facto 10th Amendment repeal by FDR’s government,
         and more broadly is part of the gradual Western decentralization since the peak
         centralization of 1950.

    7. Authority has lost respect. The old American left said something like “we all need
         to work for the common good” while the old right said something like “pay your
         dues and you’ll achieve the American dream.” The new left says “we are all equal”
         and the new right says “you ain’t the boss of me.” So, the old left/right combina-
         tion supported self-sacrifice and a stable hierarchy14, while the new one attacks
         all hierarchy as fundamentally illegitimate, as oppressive or tyrannical. This is
         reflected in the defacement and degradation of virtually every US institution over
         the last few decades, from the office of the presidency to the statues of American
         founders. George Washington and the US Capitol are no longer sacred.

   14It had many other flaws, like the suppression of individualism, political centralization, restriction
of technological innovation, and mass seizure of assets. We’re not romanticizing it. But that mid-
century ideology, which was itself the result of enormous conflict, was a recipe for a more stable order
than what we have now.

183
182                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


    8. National divorce is discussed. Secession is now officially part of the platform
        for Texas’ Republicans. And there have been an increasing number of pieces on
        the topic of “national divorce” from Democrats and Republicans alike, including
        NYMag (“No, We Can’t Get a National Divorce”), Stephen Marche (The Next
        Civil War), Barbara Walter (How Civil Wars Start), Michael Malice (“The Case
        for American Secession”), David Reaboi (“National Divorce Is Expensive, But It’s
        Worth Every Penny”), and the American Mind (“The Separation”).

    9. Radicalized movements reject the status quo. There have been countless words
        written on wokeness, on how it’s a radical ideology that thinks of the US as in-
        trinsically corrupt — as systemically x-ist for many values of x—and therefore
        doesn’t really seek to reform America so much as to capture the state to com-
        pletely transform it. See Wesley Yang, Richard Hanania, Matthew Yglesias, John
        McWhorter, Bari Weiss, and many others for discussion of different aspects of
        this.

        The thing about wokeness is that it’s not just a superficial weed growing out
        of the topsoil. It has a root system, a theory of history and ethics that’s built
        on thousands of papers, on generations of academic humanists, on Foucault and
        Derrida and the like, on deconstruction and critical race theory and so on. I
        happen to think of it as a mostly evil doctrine, as sophisticated evil promoted in
        the name of good, but I recognize it has ideological content.

        The Republican party isn’t really capable of dealing with that. But Bitcoin
        Maximalism is. If you haven’t heard of it, you will. Bitcoin Maximalism is by
        far the most important ideology in the world that many people haven’t heard of
        - yet.

        There’s philosophical depth to Maximalism. It represents a root-and-branch re-
        jection of the inflation that powers the US government and thus pays for every-
        thing. It fuses the worldview of Mises, Rothbard, Hayek, and Ron Paul with
        Bitcoin. It naturally aligns with the loss of trust in institutions, with the suspi-
        cious individual who (understandably!) no longer trusts the federal government
        or US institutions on anything. It’s not merely an edit to the state, it’s the end of
        the state. And it’s a push from an ideological direction the Wokes are ill-prepared
        for, because it’s an aracial ultra-libertarianism rather than the white nationalism
        that folks like Marche and Walter think will be their foe.

        If you want to understand Bitcoin Maximalism, read The Bitcoin Standard or
        the tweets from accounts at hive.one/bitcoin (not all are Maximalists). But be
        aware: just like wokes who reject “civility” on ideological grounds, maximalists
        have developed verbal justifications for being “toxic.”

        I disagree with the fundamental moral premise of Maximalism, which is that
        Bitcoin is the only coin and all other digital assets are sins.15 I don’t believe in

  15Just as the Communist pathologized profit, and the Christian fundamentalist pathologized in-
terest, the Maximalist pathologizes issuance. It’s certainly possible to abuse these financial tools, to

184
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE183



         one coin anymore than I believe in one state or one god. But I understand the
         power that such a belief system has. Americans don’t believe in one god anymore,
         don’t believe in monotheism. So their choice is between one state and one coin,
         between ideological monostatism and mononumism.

         That is, to beat something like the US establishment in a civil conflict, you don’t
         just need bravery, you need a more powerful Schelling Point. That’s what Bitcoin
         is for the Maximalists: the one coin that’s the alternative to the one state. If and
         when the dollar collapses due to inflation, the orange coin becomes the new blue
         jeans, the global symbol of freedom and prosperity.

         (And what’s the alternative to that alternative? Many network states as al-
         ternative to one nation state, many coins as alternatives to the one coin, many
         beliefs as the alternative to one belief system. That’s the polystatist, polynumist,
         polytheist model we describe later on in the Recentralized Center.)

  10. Bitcoin seizure could be the trigger event. All of this is a combustible mix, and
         there are many possible trigger events, but one that I see as particularly likely is
         a combination of (a) ruinous inflation followed by (b) a soaring BTC/USD price
         and then (c) the attempt by an insolvent federal government to seize Bitcoin from
         citizens.

         On the Bitcoin side, this isn’t a short-term price prediction or anything, and there
         are of course various possible failure modes16 for BTC that could prevent Bitcoin
         from being the specific cryptocurrency that drives this scenario. Nevertheless,
         because the Bitcoin protocol has mostly been technologically fixed for a while,
         its partisans have focused to a much greater extent on political innovation – like
         getting it recognized as a sovereign currency. Add in the moral importance that
         Maximalists attach to Bitcoin, and its global name recognition, and BTC is likely
         to be the coin of contention.

         On the other side, the general concept of asset seizure isn’t really even very sci-fi
         given the overnight freezing of funds for Canadian truckers and 145M Russian
         nationals. The main difference is that cryptocurrency is built to be hard to freeze.

exploit workers for profit, to charge usurious interest rates, or to issue fraudulent financial instruments.
But the answer is a system of competitive regulators: not (a) zero regulation, nor (b) the monopoly
regulation of the corrupt SEC, nor (c) the decentralized “regulation” of calling everyone a scammer all
the time just as wokes call everyone x-ists, but rather (d) a system of multiple reviewers that provide
checks and balances on market participants, and who are themselves checked and balanced by market
exit.
   16A partial list of failure modes: (a) there could be a bug in the code, (b) centralized quantum
decryption could come online faster than expected and without decentralized quantum-safe encryption
to match, (c) miners could get pressured to censor transactions as Marathon was, (d) ESG attacks could
be used against mining, (e) non-pseudonymous developers could be personally targeted, (f) enough
BTC might be left on centralized exchanges to freeze it, (g) a Great Firewall-like approach could
be used to interfere with Bitcoin at the port/packet level, potentially interfering with the protocol’s
implicit assumption of a global, connected, relatively low-latency internet, and so on. I still think
Bitcoin can succeed, but my confidence in cryptocurrency is bolstered by the fact that other coins
exist with different failure modes.

185
184                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


        A bankrupt state can and will try to seize funds held at centralized exchanges,
        but for those that have taken their funds off exchanges, the state will need to go
        house-to-house, and rubber hoses don’t scale.

        A US establishment attempt to seize Bitcoin in a time of high inflation would be
        like a repeat of FDR’s gold seizure (Executive Order 6102), except it’d be done
        during a time of declining state capacity rather than rising centralization.

        The reason something like this could be the trigger event is that neither side could
        easily back down: Wokes would have no power if their state went bankrupt, and
        Maximalists would have no money if they surrendered to the state.

        Thus, this seems like a relatively foreseeable event that could kick off the Sec-
        ond American Civil War — especially if the seizure bill is passed by the federal
        government and some states refuse to enforce it.

        How could that happen? A state-level refusal to enforce might just be part of the
        growing divergence between states from the federal government and each other,
        similar to the justification for sanctuary cities and the like. But if you wanted
        a statutory rationale, you could imagine a Constitutional Amendment proposed
        to ban Bitcoin seizure, something that would put the right to hold BTC on par
        with the right to free speech and the right to bear arms. Such an amendment
        could be ratified by many states in the run up to a possible seizure bill. Even if
        it didn’t pass nationally, any ratifying states would then cite their ratification to
        justify their refusal to enforce.


AWar for Minds, Not Lands

It’s a mistake to think a Second American Civil War would look anything like the first
Civil War, or like World War 2 for that matter. It’d be nothing like the movies with
huge movements of uniformed soldiers, tanks, and planes.

Instead it’ll just be a continuation and escalation of what we’ve seen over the last
several years: a network-to-network war to control minds, rather than state-to-state
war to control territory. A fusion of America’s domestic conflicts on social networks
and its foreign conflicts in the Middle East.

The best way to visualize this is to look at the physical map of Union-vs-Confederate
right before the Civil War, the physical map of Republican-vs-Democrat by county,
and then the digital map of Republican-vs-Democrat in the same period.

In the first Civil War, ideology and geography strongly coincided. The victory condition
for the North was obvious: invade the South. Conquer the territory to conquer the
minds. They didn’t have to kill every last Confederate, they just had to show that
resistance was futile to get the remaining Confederates to stop fighting.

In any second Civil War, ideology and geography would only weakly coincide. Look
again at that map by county. Is one side really going to invade the other? Or vice

186
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE185



versa? Is the US establishment going to seize corn fields or will its opponents move to
capture big blocks of cities? Is either side going to use huge bombs on territories where
they’d kill at least 30% of their own team? Could nuclear weapons be targeted enough
to use as political tools to get the other side to concede?

No. Instead it’ll be a war for minds, not lands. And if we look at the map of digital
space, suddenly much becomes clear. Here, the two sides are fully separated, as the
Union and Confederacy were. And now we can see why there’s been such an emphasis
on cancellation, deplatforming, silencing, and shunning. . . on making people say certain
words and hoist certain symbols. Because making a person or a company post a
particular hashtag indicates control of minds which is in turn control of digital territory.

All the discussion over the last few years around “free speech” doesn’t really engage the
fundamental issue, which is that this is a time of information war, where the victory
condition for one side is to invade the minds of the other side – because it cannot
feasibly invade the territory.

To invade the minds of the other side, and to control the digital networks – because
the tech companies that greenlight transactions, communications, and online behavior
have in many ways become the de facto privatized governments of the Western world.
The power to determine what people can and cannot do in the digital world belongs to
the people who run these networks. And so controlling these networks, by controlling
the minds of people who run them, is the key to maintaining control over the US in a
digital time. That’s why there’s been such a push by the US establishment to wokify
the big tech companies.

However, a network that can’t be controlled in this way, and that isn’t run by any one
person – like Bitcoin – well, that’s a form of resistance. The set of web3 networks that
are more decentralized17 than centralized Silicon Valley tech companies, that are run
by communities – those too are a form of resistance.

As such, if the first Civil War was the “War Between the States”, the second Civil War
will be the “War Between the Networks.” The graphs we’ve shown relate to Red-vs-
Blue, but add a tint of yellow to each group and rotate it a bit. Then you’ll get what
we think is the likely future axis of conflict, which is Bitcoin-Orange-vs-Dollar-Green.

In areas where Greens control the state, they may use militarized police, tech company
surveillance, deplatforming, denunciation in media, arrests, seizures, and the like. In
those areas, Orange may respond with an insurgency campaign that looks like Northern
Ireland or the Middle East. But in areas where Oranges control the state, and Greens

   17Another issue where Web3 Technologists disagree with Bitcoin Maximalists is on the question of
decentralization. Maximalists contend that Bitcoin is decentralized and all other networks are not,
that decentralization is a binary property. Because they are mononumists, they sometimes refer to this
in monotheistic terms as an “immaculate conception”, using a term from Christian theology. The short
counterargument is that obviously Bitcoin wasn’t decentralized on day zero, when Satoshi Nakamoto
was the only user, so it must have become more decentralized over time — and so how exactly did that
happen, and what are the metrics for decentralization? A full counterargument, along with proposed
metrics for intermediate levels of decentralization, is in this piece on Quantifying Decentralization.

187
186                           CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



are in the minority, these tactics could reverse. Think about the BLM riots, or Jan 6,
or the doxxing of Supreme Court Justices by angry establishmentarians, or the various
street fights between right and left, or the constant digital struggle that plays out online
every day, and project out a future where those kind of network warfare tactics become
daily occurrences. Like the portmanteau “lawfare”, think of this as “netwar.”


Maximalist vs Woke Rotates Left and Right

The reason the terms “left” and “right” don’t exactly fit for the projected conflict of
Orange vs Green is that in many respects the Bitcoin Orange would be the revolutionary
class faction and the Dollar Greens would be the ruling class faction.18

Basically, those who side with the US establishment in this scenario would be the
same personality type as those who sided with the ancien regime during the French
Revolution: they’d be fighting to preserve the past. Their message would be one of
particularism, of American nationalism, of continued dollar supremacy.

By contrast, those who side with Bitcoin Maximalism would be a revolutionary per-
sonality fighting to overturn what they saw as tyranny. Their message would be one
of universalism, of a system that puts everyone worldwide on the same playing field —
and that doesn’t privilege America over the rest of the globe like the dollar does.

This will be an extremely uncomfortable position for the US establishment, because
for the first time19 in memory they’ll represent the technologically conservative faction,
the less universalist side, the pre-modern side.

But you can already see the foreshadowing in terms of how legacy media inveighs
against technology, how they hate the future, how they want to jam social media and
the internet back into the garage, how they want to turn back the clock on all those
things that have disrupted their political control.

Maximalism is thus a kind of leapfrogging. If Trump invoked a mythical past, and the
US establishment represents an attempt to freeze the present in amber, the Bitcoin
Maximalists are willing to drive the system towards an uncertain future. That’s why
a fair number of conservative Republicans will side with Green, and why revolutionary
Democrats will side with Orange. Bitcoin Maximalism is a movement that knows it
can’t “Make America Great Again”, because that America no longer exists and perhaps
never did, so it’s willing to take the entire fiat system down.

Orange is thus comfortable with a higher level of chaos than a suddenly conservative
US establishment. It is ok with the uncertainty of crypto-anarchy over the certainty of
inflationary tyranny. And it is not looking to mend the federal government, but to end
it. Unlike the reformist Republican, Maximalism is playing to win. And so it might.

   18See Left is the new Right is the new Left.
   19There were times during the 20th century when American progressives thought the USSR was
more modern; as Lincoln Steffens said, “I have seen the future, and it works!” But by the end, the
Soviets felt gray and stiff, not revolutionary.

188
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE187



Who Wins?

It’s extremely difficult to forecast what happens, but I do think that in the long run
the Maximalists may win at least some territory in a Second American Civil War,
because they’ll eventually outlast the money printing of the US establishment. The
value proposition in the American regions that go Maximalist will be “freedom”, though
others will perceive it as anarchy.

Why could Maximalists win a war of attrition? Every day the price of BTC/USD goes
up is another victory in the Maximalist social war against the US establishment; every
day it goes down is a temporary defeat. 20 Because the US government can’t invade
the rest of the world, and because other states won’t necessarily listen to it, it can’t
easily seize Bitcoin globally. So long as the long-term price trend is up, which is not
guaranteed, then Maximalists win.

That does lead to a related point: with an estimated 300M cryptocurrency holders
worldwide at the time of writing, hundreds of millions of people who aren’t Maximal-
ists already believe in Bitcoin. And it’s on track to be billions by 2030. So long as
those holders don’t sell their Bitcoin, that’s a fundamentally new international support
network of a kind that MAGA Republicans don’t have. That is, a man in Brazil doesn’t
necessarily care about American Republicans vs Democrats — he’s not an American
nationalist, and doesn’t have a dog in that fight — but he may well hold Bitcoin. And
so long as he doesn’t sell BTC for dollars, he’s indirectly supporting Maximalists. Yet
his foreign support comes in an intangible and ideological form that feels acceptable to
the proud American Bitcoin Maximalist, as opposed to (say) the explicit support of a
foreign military getting involved on US soil.

With that said, the US establishment could also win a war of attrition. Their starting
advantages are immense: the universities, the media, the military, the intelligence
agencies, most of the tech companies, and the federal government itself. The US
establishment also has an elite global support base: all the people who sympathize
with it around the world: the McKinsey types, the Ivy grads, the frequent flyer class,
and the people who still think America is the country from the movies.21 Even if
the establishment can’t force foreign governments to seize BTC, they may try seizing
Bitcoin for their own reasons, though other states will instead vector towards the
direction of economic freedom.

   20This is why Maximalists may actually push laws against holding other coins in their jurisdiction.
You might think that such advocacy would be an ideologically inconsistent fusion of anti-Fed and
pro-SEC, but there is a logic to the illogic. Maximalists are in favor of anything that makes “number-
go-up”, what they think of as bringing the price of Bitcoin up in the short run. Many have convinced
themselves that investment into the web3 cryptoeconomy actually harms the price of Bitcoin rather
than supporting it. Again, just like a Communist pathologizes profit, or a Christian fundamentalist
pathologizes interest, a Maximalist pathologizes the issuance or purchase of any digital asset other
than Bitcoin.
   21There’s a perhaps apocryphal concept called “Paris Syndrome” for the shock experienced by those
who’d only known the movie version of Paris, and then were faced with the dreary reality of what it
actually is.

189
188                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


Moreover, even if the US establishment does lose some territory, it will likely hang
on to the Northeast and the West Coast. The value proposition in those regions that
stick with the establishment will be “democracy”, though others will perceive it as fiat
“tyranny”.

During all this, the pressure of conflict could force people to the ideological extremes.
The closest movie archetypes for the Green and Orange sides could be a more oppressive
version of Portlandia and a more functional version of Mad Max. Cartoonish caricatures
come to life.


Wars Aren’t Romantic

If it’s not abundantly clear, I take no sides here, and am not rooting for anarchy. I’d
prefer a stable world where we could focus on mathematics and getting to Mars than
the chaos that may soon ensue. And I have no illusions about how bad civil conflict can
get; there are no unscathed winners in wars. Read David Hines for a good depiction of
what political violence is actually like.

        Political violence is like war, like violence in general: people have a fan-
        tasy about how it works. This is the fantasy of how violence works: you
        SMITE YOUR ENEMIES IN A GRAND AND GLORIOUS CLEANSING
        BECAUSE OF COURSE YOU’RE BETTER.

        Grand and glorious smiting isn’t actually how violence works. I’ve worked
        a few places that have had serious political violence. And I’m not sure how
        to really describe it so people get it. This is a stupid comparison, but here:
        imagine that one day Godzilla walks through your town. The next day, he
        does it again. And he keeps doing it. Some days he steps on more people
        than others. That’s it. That’s all he does: trudging through your town,
        back and forth.

        Your town’s not your town now; it’s The Godzilla Trudging Zone.

Point: civil conflict is not romantic, it’s not targeted, it’s not proportional. It’s insane.
If you think the scenario of American Anarchy is a possibility, you probably want to
get as far away from it as you can, regardless of your “sympathies” with either side.

And then you should help build a peaceful alternative to American Anarchy. But not
the alternative that China will offer, which we’ll cover next.


4.5.2 Chinese Control

Attempted Coup Leads to Total Control

While in the West we may see American Anarchy, in the East we could see Chinese
Control.

Before the US enters serious internal conflict, it could support some kind of China Coup

190
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE189


— whether with words or with more than that — as written about by Roger Garside in
the eponymous book China Coup, as hinted at by parties as different as George Soros
and America’s JSOC, and as previously accomplished in many acknowledged regime
changes and unacknowledged Color Revolutions around the world.

For reasons we’ll get into, I don’t think such a coup is likely to be successful. But
the reaction to any coup attempt by the CCP could be the most intense crackdown
on domestic opposition we’ve ever seen. It would be an AI-powered ripping up of
Chinese society by the roots that puts every citizen under suspicion and makes it very
difficult for Chinese nationals to leave with their property, to “runxue”. It may also be
accompanied by deniable (or overt) Chinese retaliation against the US for attempting a
coup, retaliation which could take the form of targeted shortages of key physical goods
to exacerbate American inflation and supply chain woes.

If and when the coup is quashed, the CCP will then export their coup-defeating surveil-
lance state to other countries. And their value proposition to the world will be Chinese
Control — the complete opposite of American Anarchy.


China Blocks the Exits

A specific prediction is that we’ll see a world where it becomes increasingly difficult for
Chinese people to leave the country or get their property out of the digital yuan ecosys-
tem without CCP permission. Take the existing hukou system of internal passports,
the WeChat system of red/yellow/green travel restrictions based on health status, the
aggressive COVID lockdowns, and the recent passport restrictions — then fuse them
with a surveillance state that can track people globally, aWeChat superapp that can
unperson them, and a digital yuan that can freeze their assets.

There are trends that point in the direction of digital and physical movement restriction
already. Chinese passport issuance has already declined dramatically, down “95 per cent
in the first quarter compared to before the pandemic.” Outbound travel is similarly
down 95%, with 8.5 million people leaving China in 2021 relative to 154 million in
2019. China has also been using COVID quarantine codes to stop people from moving
money or moving around. And Chinese capital controls, always strict, may get even
more intense with the rollout of the digital yuan. So that makes exit hard.

Conversely, on the entrance side, while it will still be possible for approved Chinese
citizens to travel to places like Iran or Russia that are effectively military allies, the
countries where the Chinese state lacks a hard power presence will start turning down
Chinese nationals due to espionage concerns. This has already been happening.

This combination of outbound restrictions imposed by their government and inbound
restrictions from other governments will make life hard for the Chinese liberals and
internationalists who disagree with the system, the “runxue” types. They won’t be
able to politically dissent, but it’ll also be hard for them to leave the country with their
property, as many will want to do. Such an act will be prevented or portrayed as a
traitorous run-on-the-bank, particularly if the economy isn’t doing well. Think about

191
190                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


how enthusiastic Putin has been about the “renationalization of the elites”, and how
closely the CCP has been watching Western tactics during the Russo-Ukraine War.
They recognize that any commercial linkage with the West is a point of vulnerability
during a conflict. So it’s quite likely that CCP will increasingly make it difficult for
people to exit physically or digitally.


The Path to Chinese Control

What are the factors that lead us to this prediction, that CCP will emphasize the
“loyalty” part of Hirschman’s triad and turn strongly against both voice and exit?

    1. Shutting down opposition across the spectrum. This plot from MERICs is worth
        looking at, as it reminds us that the CCP is not solely against US-style “democ-
        ratization”, but also against many different kinds of ideologies that differ from
        the party-state’s current line. Whether that opposition is Maoist (like Bo Xilai),
        democratic (like Hong Kong and Taiwan), Islamic (like the Uighurs), Christian
        (like the churches), technologist (like Jack Ma and other founders), or even ultra-
        nationalist, the CCP stands at the middle of an ideological circle and constantly
        monitors everyone for deviation.

    2. Inculcating Chinese nationalism. Just as the US has gone through a Great Awo-
        kening since the 2013, Chinese society has been driven by Xuexi Qiangguo into a
        phase of ultra-nationalism. There is opposition to this internally, but it remains
        to be seen whether it actually flips the nationalism or simply moderates it.

    3. Building a surveillance state. Much has been written on this, but the sheer scale
        of what has been built isn’t well understood. While it’s worth being aware of
        Gell-Mann amnesia, this is actually an area where US establishment media is
        closer to reality than it is domestically, in part because relative to the Chinese
        state it’s actually opposition media. See videos like this from DW and this.

    4. Hooking it into AI. Read Kai-Fu Lee’s AI Superpowers and then read this, this,
        and this. Supplement it with Dan Wang’s letters, or this 2019 post from a Chinese
        intellectual published at Reading the Chinese Dream that is still able to question
        the deployment of all the surveillance.

    5. Piloting the system during COVID. The green/yellow/red health codes rolled out
        on WeChat during the early days of COVID are used for travel restrictions - and
        have been repurposed to simply prevent people from traveling in a deniable way.

    6. Cutting off digital and physical exit. Misbehavior in China can get you removed
        from WeChat, which is like unpersoning you given how many services it’s hooked
        into, public and private. More recently, China has repeatedly made it difficult
        to leave the country on the grounds that doing so would spread COVID: “Trips
        in or out of the country made by mainland citizens in 2021 plunged nearly 80%
        compared with the level in 2019, NIA data showed.”

    7. Selling to other governments. Both China and the US have sold surveillance

192
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE191


        technology to the globe, but one difference is that China can execute better in
        the physical world - so smart cities built with Chinese technology have full-stack
        surveillance.

    8. Justifying as anti-imperialism. The educational system and the big-screen movies
        like Battle of Lake Changjin and Wolf Warrior 2 position China as defending
        itself from Western imperialism. And this filters down to the small scale, like
        this video of an official defending Shanghai’s lockdown with the narrative that
        China will eventually have a war with the US, so citizens need to get in line for
        the lockdown.

    9. Pointing to relative stability. The “Harmonious Society” narrative begun under
        Hu Jintao has been mentioned less in an international context by Xi Jinping,
        who has not exactly been pursuing harmony abroad. But it’s still a useful tool
        to justify social control – like NYT talks about censorship and social controls to
        preserve “democracy”, CCP talks about censorship to maintain “harmony.”

  10. China Coup could be the trigger event. The US establishment has put out videos
        and articles that come close to calling for a coup in China. George Soros broadly
        hints at it in speeches like this. And folks like Roger Garside literally wrote a
        book on it.

An attempted coup, whether actually American-backed or simply accused of being
such, could be the trigger event for rolling out a fearsome system of Chinese Control.
AI would be turned on the population, and any even mildly Western-sympathic groups
would be pattern-recognized and dug out by their roots. Nationalist mobs might par-
ticipate, online or even in person. It could get very ugly.

The last part is important: Chinese Control would have significant popular support.
The country is heavily nationalist now. It is possible the swing towards nationalism
partially reverses — there are significant factions in China who do not like the current
trend — but I think it’s too much to think that China is going to “go democratic.”
America’s internal chaos means it is simply not an admirable model for much of the
world anymore, and while some educated Chinese liberals may indeed want to runxue,
there is momentum towards nationalism among much of China’s youth. I may be
wrong about this, but putting it all on one person or even one party doesn’t feel right.
The ideological current towards Chinese ultra-nationalism feels stronger than Xi the
person, or even the CCP, and may outlast him in the event of a black swan.

Anyway, with the coup defeated, CCP would then sell a turnkey version of their coup-
defeating surveillance state to other countries as a way to (a) stop any possible con-
tagion of American anarchy, (b) control crime, (c) prevent increasingly mobile citizens
from leaving with their funds to other countries, and (d) prevent unrest of any kind, le-
gitimate or not. It would ensure that any leader currently in charge remains in charge,
and would be picked by many governments for exactly that reason.

193
192                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION



China Caveat

There’s an important caveat to all this. Much Western coverage of China is unremit-
tingly negative. And certainly the scenario described herein is not a particularly rosy
one. But we need to temper that negativity with a dose of realism.

First, why are we even discussing China? Why aren’t we discussing Chad or Chile?
Because China has on balance executed phenomenally well since 1978. After Deng
Xiaoping’s reforms, the country really has risen to the workshop of the world, with an
enormous trade surplus, a surfeit of hard currency, and dozens of huge new cities. It’s
the #2 economy, the #2 military, and the #2 in tech unicorns. All of that happened
from a standing start over the last 40-odd years, since Deng’s turnaround of China
(called Boluan Fanzheng).

Conversely, over the last 30 or so years, the US establishment has squandered perhaps
the greatest lead in human history, going from complete and uncontested dominance in
1991 to internal conflict and potentially implosion. Moreover, as noted in What about
China, huh?, it’s not that the US establishment is more ethical than the CCP when
it comes to civil liberties, it’s just less competent. After all, the US establishment
also does warrantless surveillance via the NSA, unconstitutional search and seizure via
the TSA, arbitrary confiscation of property via civil forfeiture, censorship of political
keywords just like WeChat, and has pushed for disinformation agencies, civilian dis-
armament, digital censorship, and the like. The US establishment copied the CCP
on lockdown, without ever really admitting it was doing so, and funded the lab that
may have leaked the coronavirus. It’s also bombed and destabilized many countries
around the world. And if we’re honest, over the last two decades, the US has killed
and displaced far more people abroad than the CCP has.

That might be hard to hear for a Westerner, but what all of that means is that (a)
the CCP does have some cred with many “neutral” countries, (b) it also has cred with
huge swaths of its own population thanks in part to both nationalist propaganda and
actual execution, (c) that relative cred will grow if America descends into anarchy, (d)
the cred will make it easier for CCP to roll out more Chinese Control at home and
abroad, and (e) the cred will actually attract some Chinese ancestry people back to
China even as others want to leave.

Wait – that last point seems paradoxical. How could people want to come to Chinese
Control if we’ve just spent all this time talking about so many want to leave?

Think about Microsoft. It’s a strong company. Most people in the world would be glad
to get a job at Microsoft. But many of the very best would find it stifling, and would
instead strike out on their own to join or found a tech company. There’s simultaneously
a demand for some people to join Microsoft while others want to leave.

In the case of China, this is compounded by China’s evaporating soft power in regions
where it doesn’t have hard power. The climate of suspicion towards Chinese nationals
has ramped up dramatically in recent years, and it’s generally not flagged as “racism”

194
4.5. AMERICAN ANARCHY, CHINESE CONTROL, INTERNATIONAL INTERMEDIATE193


by the establishment press. This could make a good number of Chinese ancestry people
leave rather than be singled out in the event of a hot conflict.

So, that’s what could happen to China: significant inflows of Chinese ancestry people,
along with some outflows (or blocked outflows) of elites.

And the Chinese Control scenario we’ve described, while dystopian to the ambitious
and freedom-seeking, will likely be acceptable to many people who prize stability over
all else and see scenes of flames and gunfire (whether representative or not) coming
from American Anarchy. It won’t be trivial to beat the average standard of living that
Chinese Control may be capable of delivering. It will appeal to many. And that brings
us to the International Intermediate.


4.5.3 International Intermediate

What’s the International Intermediate?

They’re just the people who don’t want their societies to descend into American An-
archy, but also want a better option than Chinese Control. That’s India and Israel,
but also American centrists, Chinese liberals, global technologists, and people from
other places that want to steer a different course from the US establishment, from
crypto-anarchy, and from Chinese Control.

Why mention India and Israel so prominently? Call it a hunch, but those two groups
are #1 and #2 in immigrant tech founders in the US. India is, separately, also #3 in
tech unicorns after the US and China. At the state level India and Israel are now highly
aligned, and at the individual level Indians and Israelis tend to be globally flexible and
English-speaking.

So, insofar as there is a third technological pole outside the US and China, it will prob-
ably have significant Indo-Israeli character, with servers positioned in their respective
territories, and deals inked across borders.

Of course, it will also have contributions from all around the world. It’s probably
easier to say who the International Intermediate is not than who it is. It’s not the US
establishment, or places heavily aligned with it. And it’s not China or heavily China-
aligned regions like Russia and Iran. But it could include places like the Visegrad
countries (anti-Russia but also skeptical of much in America), or South Korea (which
elected a pro-Bitcoin head of state), or even Vietnam (now pulling away from China
to side more with India).

Because it’s “everyone else”, by default this International Intermediate is just raw ma-
terial – the 80% of the world that is not American or Chinese is just a formless mass
without internal structure. Indeed, that’s what happened to the “Third World” during
last century’s Cold War. The Non-Aligned countries weren’t just not aligned with the
US or USSR, they weren’t aligned with each other.

This time, however, rather than being the Third World / non-aligned movement, a

195
194                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


subset of the many billions of people in the International Intermediate can align around
web3 to try to build alternatives to American Anarchy and Chinese Control. And that
subset we call the Recentralized Center.


4.6 Victory Conditions and Surprise Endings

Many video games have the concept of good and bad endings, like Shattered Union
and Starcraft. We’ll take that approach with the sci-fi scenario we outlined, describing
some Victory Conditions for different factions as well as Surprise Endings that give an
unexpected twist. Again, this is a way to think through an uncertain future with some
scenario analysis, not a hard and fast set of predictions.


4.6.1 The Victory Conditions

The “Base Rate Fallacy” Fallacy

This is a scenario where the US establishment wins, and averts American Anarchy.

In 2020, Tyler Cowen wrote about how “base-raters” and “growthers” differ regarding
the coronavirus. Growthers looked at the growth rate of the virus, which at the time
was exponential. Base-raters start by asking how often something has happened before;
they assume things will more or less stay the same.

So, base-raters assume the post-war order remains intact; the dollar remains number
one; the USA stays number one; China will collapse like Japan; everybody always says
the West is declining, but it’ll always reinvent itself; it’ll be okay; you’re too concerned
or worried about this, etc.

If the Base Rate Fallacy is assuming tomorrow will be like today, then the Base Rate
Fallacy Fallacy is assuming that the Base Rate Fallacy is always a fallacy. After all,
tomorrow often is like today! The growther always thinks that change is going to
happen, but it may not.

So what does the establishment win scenario look like? It’s the same thing we’ve already
got. The post-war order just keeps on keeping on in a zombified fashion. There’s no
dramatic acceleration or collapse. Instead, the West just keeps reinventing itself and
all is mostly well.

If you want a faithful rendition of this worldview, this thread by Vuk Vukovic is decent.
I disagree with many bits of it, including the idea that discord is our strength. And I
think in general that the thread is fairly anti-empirical; the graph of long-run interest
rate trends alone shows that something is going to run out of juice eventually. Still,
it’s worth a hearing.


China Can Make a Pencil

This is a scenario where the CCP wins, and Chinese Control triumphs.

196
4.6. VICTORY CONDITIONS AND SURPRISE ENDINGS                                  195


How might China become the most prosperous and stable country in the world, even
if it’s unpopular in some places abroad, and even if the US attempts to financially or
socially sanction it? China would become an autarkic autonomous autocracy.

To understand this, let’s start with a famous libertarian story: “The Pencil.” The
idea is that no one person can make a pencil. After all, a seemingly simple pencil is
composed of wood, graphite, yellow paint, the metal that contains the eraser, and the
eraser rubber itself. But creating each of these things in-house would require running a
variety of different agricultural and mining operations. So instead of having one person
do all of that, the capitalist system makes a pencil in a “networked” way. We use
prices as an API, so that different organizations can spin up, produce components in a
cost-effective way, use their profits to grow or maintain themselves, and adapt without
coordinating with each other.

But that was then. Maybe Chinese Communism with the digital yuan is different.
What happens if you have a computer system which really does know about every
vendor, that has every record of every payment, that can actually see the global supply
chain, and that knows every single person (or robot) required to make that pencil? It is
a large, but finite problem after all. Maybe such a system can solve Hayek’s calculation
problem.

We already have proof points for this. If you run a two-sided marketplace, you’ll find
contra Hayek that not all knowledge is local. For example, Sidecar lost to Uber because
drivers set prices themselves, as opposed to setting them centrally. Hayekians would
agree that Sidecar’s approach was optimal: drivers have local knowledge and central
planning can’t work. But Uber’s central planning did work. They had a global view
of supply & demand. And riders wanted speed, not price shopping.

So, that’s what this win scenario contemplates. If China integrates AI with the digital
yuan, and makes their entire economy computable, at their scale they might actually
be able to make a pencil. And everything else.

Recall that previous abstractions like “six degrees of separation” or “written history” be-
came very real once social networks digitized decades of interaction and communication
by billions of people. So too would previous verbal abstractions like “the economy” or
“the supply chain” become actual computable objects when you have every transaction
and vendor in the same database. Basically, all the blockchain supply chain concept
actually could work, but only if all payments (and hence receipts) are on-chain — or
in something like a blockchain, which is what the digital yuan may be.

This is doubly true if AI-driven robots are carrying out many of these functions. China
might be able to internalize huge swaths of the economy. It could mean full stack
production of everything, hyperdeflation of living costs within China, where labor be-
comes electricity. In this scenario, no one person can make a pencil, but China can
make a pencil, because they can algorithmically coordinate the supply chain of millions
of cooperating humans in a way no one has ever been able to do before. They’d still
need the raw materials, but their alliances with African countries, Russia, and places

197
196                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


like Iran might take care of that.

It’s essentially the vision of Red Plenty, Soviet-style central planning made feasible
with superior computation and robotics — so that the robots actually did what you
said they’d do, and didn’t have that pesky self-interest getting in the way like humans
did. It’d be a riff on Aaron Bastani’s fully automated luxury communism, where the
communistic parts would be the robotic parts — as they would lack any economic
interests of their own, and move as one.

In this win scenario, the Chinese Communists might have the highest standard of living
on the planet, as much higher than the US as the US was relative to the USSR, not
only because they actually make physical things, but because they could see the full
stack, have data on everything, track every transaction, and deploy AI and robotics in
the physical world.

Of course, that standard of living would be achieved in an ethnonationalist society
with a bone to pick with the US in particular. And it might result in a Greater East
Asian Co-Prosperity Sphere 2.0, this time under Chinese rather than Japanese terms.
Everyone would have to bend to Chinese hard power to get the benefit of their robotic
economy.

In this scenario, the Chinese might even choose to copy the tactics America used in
the Russo-Ukrainian war: namely, physically sanction any group or state that opposes
them, thereby cutting them off from the supply of goods from an increasingly physically
autarkic China.

I don’t like this world, because it cuts against the convenient outcome of the late 20th
century, in which the system that produced freedom also produced prosperity. But the
experience of two-sided marketplaces shows it is a possibility.


4.6.2 The Surprise Endings

Duopoly of Digital Despotism

In this surprise ending, the U.S. establishment and the CCP work together to stop the
global Bitcoin and web3 insurgents. It would be like the US and the USSR aligning
against the Third World.

Now, there was actually one example where that happened, when the US and the Soviet
Union were on the same side, and that was the first Iraq War in 1990. The Soviet Union
actually voted with the US in the UN Security Council to condemn Iraq. That was a
huge moment, because normally they were reflexively oppositional.

The explicit version would be something like this, where the otherwise hostile US
establishment and CCP both decide that BTC and/or web3 are a threat to their power,
and try to denounce it at the level of the UN, a bit like their quasi-cooperation on non-
political issues.

198
4.6. VICTORY CONDITIONS AND SURPRISE ENDINGS                                  197


There’s also an implicit version of it, where they team up without teaming up. The US
establishment on many levels admires the CCP crackdown on speech. For example, in
The Atlantic they said China took the right course on internet speech, and in the NYT
they noted that Free Speech Is Killing Us. The US establishment did copy Chinese
lockdown, without admitting it.

And so you could imagine them teaming up without teaming up, where China does
something, then the US establishment copies it, maybe without acknowledging it, and
they thereby perform an unacknowledged pincer attack against technologies that oppose
them, a bit like the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.

We call that scenario the duopoly of digital despotism.


Bitcoin Ends Human War, but not Robot War

A key thesis of The Sovereign Individual – and an important argument for Bitcoin and
cryptocurrencies more generally – is that if a government cannot seize money, then it
cannot start wars.

Why? If a state can’t coerce, it can’t pay to enforce conscription, or pay the conscripts
themselves, or seize the money to pay for all the equipment needed to prosecute the
expensive industrialized wars of the 20th and early 21st century.

There’s a book called Gold, Blood, and Power: Finance and War Through the Ages
that describes how finance was a weapon of war, and that the 20th century was one of
the first times where huge wars have been fought without any country running out of
money. The only thing the countries ran out of were bodies, because they were giant
centralized states that could seize everything in their territory, and could propagandize
everyone in their territory, and could just drive total war. So the Nazis, Soviets, and
Americans just grabbed everything in their territory to fight these wars, like enormous
ghosts that commanded millions of bodies in these titanic ideological combats.

How did they command those bodies? If you think about The Tripolar Triangle, the
lower left corner of NYT is voice, and it’s convincing people with words. The lower
right corner of BTC is choice or exit, and it’s convincing people with money. You can
think of these as left and right democracy respectively.

But there’s a third pole. The top pole is loyalty. It’s CCP. Today, it’s AI. And it’s
convincing people without convincing people at all. Because they’re all literally one.
It’s harmony. And robots fit at that pole. Why? Because unlike a human soldier, a
robot can’t be propagandized. And unlike a human soldier, a robot doesn’t need to be
paid, just charged.

So: the problem is that Bitcoin could end human war, but not robot War. There would
still be the question of funding the industrial capacity to manufacture the robots in the
first place. But if you could get past that bootstrap problem. . . then there’s a scenario
where CCP’s AI beats both BTC and NYT, and war keeps going. And now the only

199
198                        CHAPTER 4. DECENTRALIZATION, RECENTRALIZATION


reliable soldiers are robot soldiers that can’t be propagandized by NYT and don’t need
to be paid in BTC.


4.7 Towards a Recentralized Center

Our base scenario doesn’t contemplate an extended Second Cold War between com-
munism and capitalism.

But we do think that the choice between American Anarchy and Chinese Control can
be seen as a kind of global ideological struggle of a different kind, as a choice between
decentralization and centralization.

Do you go with the failed centralization of NYT and the declining US establishment?
The total decentralization of Bitcoin Maximalism? Or the totalitarian centralization
of the CCP?

A better answer might be: none of the above. That instead of choosing either anarchic
decentralization or coercive centralization, we choose volitional recentralization.


4.7.1 In Defense of Recentralization

When you mention a recentralized center, at first it seems laughable. The centralists
will say “what’s the point of decentralizing then? Just stick with our existing system!”
And the decentralists will say “new boss, same as the old boss, I prefer freedom!”
Derisive references to Rube Goldberg Machines and Animal Farm will abound.

But the whole point is that the new boss is not the same as the old boss, anymore
than Apple was the same as BlackBerry, Amazon was the same as Barnes and No-
ble, or America was the same as Britain. Recentralization means new leaders, fresh
blood. Just as companies and technologies keep leapfrogging each other, so too can
new societies with One Commandments combine moral and technological innovation
to genuinely progress beyond our status quo.

Recentralization is not about going full circle and making zero progress. It’s the helical
theory of history. Recentralization, done right, is a cycle back to centralization from
one vantage point but a step forward from another.

I don’t agree with him on everything, but Yuval Harari has a good quote on this:

        I mean we need institutions actually more, but there is this wave of distrust
        against them. Now, it doesn’t mean we need the old institutions. It doesn’t
        mean that we have to stick with the old media. Maybe we need new media
        institutions, which will be more diverse, which will give more people a
        chance to voice their opinions, but in the end we will need to build these
        institutions. The idea that we can just do without them, that we’ll have
        just this free market of ideas and anybody can say anything, and we don’t
        want institutions to kind of stand in the middle, and curate and decide

200
4.7. TOWARDS A RECENTRALIZED CENTER                                                   199


        what is reliable and what is not reliable, this doesn’t work, it’s been tried
        so many times in history.

        You know, if you look at religious history, to take a counter example, so you
        have in Christianity, again and again these people coming and saying, “you
        know, we don’t want the Catholic Church, this institution, let’s just every
        person can read the Bible for himself and know the truth, what is more
        simple than that, why do we need an institution,” and you have the Refor-
        mation, the protestant Reformation. And within twenty years or fifty years,
        they realize that when you let every person read the Bible for themselves
        you get 100 different interpretations, [each] radically different.

        So eventually someone comes and says “No, these are the correct interpreta-
        tions” and you get the Lutheran church. And after 100 years, someone says
        “wait, but the whole idea of the Reformation was to get rid of the Church
        so we don’t want the Lutheran church. Let every person just read the Bible
        and understand by themselves.” And you have chaos. And after 50 years,
        you have the Baptist church, and this church, and that.. you always go back
        to institutions. So it’s the same with the kind of information explosion that
        we have right now.

Note that in this example the Protestants, and then the Lutherans, and then the
Baptists had to attract people to their interpretations. Many other competing de-
nominations did not. This process of constantly forking and innovating and having it
compete in the marketplace brings in new blood.

And that’s the concept of the recentralized center. The way to demonstrate it’s a step
forward is via mass exodus of people from both American Anarchy and Chinese Control
to the recentralized center, to high-trust startup societies and network states.

201
Chapter 5



From Nation States to Network States




5.1 Why Now?

Why now? After almost 400 years of the Westphalian nation state, why do we think
the status quo could change?

First, the status quo. What is the modern nation state, anyway? What is a nation, for
that matter? How was state formation enabled long ago by technological innovations
like mapmaking and print capitalism? When did the political events transpire that led
to the rise of the nation state? And what were the historical alternatives?

Then, the change. What are the contemporary catalysts, the technological and political
developments that promise to alter centuries of practice? What are the concepts, charts,
calculations, and citations that suggest big changes are in the offing? And what might
a network state even look like?


5.2 On Nation States

You may think you know what a nation state is, but you probably haven’t given it
much thought. Poke on the abstraction a bit, and fun ensues. You start realizing how
different the nation is from the state, how tricky it is to determine who qualifies as a
“nation,” how confusing our modern terminology around this topic is, and how many
other modes of human organization represent potential competitors to the nation state.
That exploration opens the door to the network state.

In the process, you’ll encounter all those philosophers people vaguely recall from school.
You know, Locke and Rousseau, Plato and Aristotle, the subjects of countless boring
book reports — many of them make a showing in this chapter. But their presence
here is different from the typical dryasdust college lecture, because the network state
makes political science an applied science, more like political technology. You are
listening with intent to repeat. That is, just like cryptocurrencies gave people other

                                                               200

202
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    201


than the Fed Chair a reason to learn about everything from seignorage to demurrage,
cryptocountries give people other than the Founding Fathers the ability to put political
theory into political practice.

But only if you understand that theory, so let’s dive in.


5.2.1 What is a Nation State?

The most obvious definition is that a nation state is a geographic region of the world
ruled by a group of humans we call a government. It’s what we talk about when we
refer to “countries” like the United States of America and the People’s Republic of
China. It’s a flag-labeled region on a political map of the globe.

Britannica provides a more precise definition, namely that a nation state is a “territo-
rially bounded sovereign polity” that is “ruled in the name of a community of citizens
that identify themselves as a nation.” And that latter bit is key, because a nation state
is not just a government that controls a territory. It’s supposed to be a government
that represents a distinct people, a nation.


5.2.2 What is the Nation State System?

There’s an excellent passage from Joshua Keating in his book Invisible Countries on
the peculiarity of the nation state system. He analogizes the system to a selective club
with the following eight rules:

             Rule 1: A country is a territory defined by borders mutually agreed
                upon by all countries.

             Rule 2: A country must have a state that controls (or at least seeks
                to control) the legitimate use of force within its territory, and a pop-
                ulation of citizens.

             Rule 3: Every spot on the earth’s landmass must be occupied by a
                country.

             Rule 4: Every person on the planet must be a citizen of at least one
                country.

             Rule 5: On paper, all countries have the same legal standing—Tuvalu
                has just as much right to its countryhood as China, Somalia just as
                much as Switzerland—even if they are politically and economically
                highly unequal.

             Rule 6: Consent of the people within each country is preferred, but
                not required. Tyranny or de facto anarchy within a country is not
                grounds for loss of club membership.

             Rule 7: Under some circumstances, one or more countries may invade
                or occupy another country, but not eliminate its countryhood or redraw

203
202                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


                its borders.

             Rule 8: The currently existing set of countries and the borders be-
                tween them should be left in place whenever possible—that is, the
                club prefers not to admit new members.

Keating goes on to note that the rules of this club are backed by the institutions of
the UN and the military force of the US, and that the agreement of billions of people
through their governments on the current world order is what preserves “cartographic
stasis.”

Note that even if one thinks of the UN as ineffectual, it’s a Schelling Point for the
system. Nothing else has as much legitimacy, as many backlinks.


Assumptions of the Nation State System

We can describe the assumptions of the nation state system in a different lens, one
that makes it easier to understand the differences between this system and the network
state system we will introduce in the following pages:

      Physical first. The physical map of the world is primary.

      Composition. In theory, a nation state is composed of a single nation (the people)
        and an administrative entity (the state). In practice, some “nation states” are
        really multinational empires, while some nations are stateless nations.

      No terra incognita. The modern nation state system takes for granted that there
        is no terra incognita: that the map of the physical world is fully known, such that
        it can be subdivided.

      No terra nullius. The system also takes for granted that there’s no terra nullius,
        no unclaimed land. With few exceptions, every piece of land on the surface of
        the earth is spoken for by one and only one state. Much of the ocean is likewise
        split up this way, aside from international waters.

      Top-down division of land. The fully visible map is carved into geographical
        regions called states, with borders precisely demarcated by latitudes and longi-
        tudes.

      One state per citizen. People are typically citizens of just one state, changing
        citizenship is infrequent, and most citizens are governed by the same state as
        their parents. The primary method of citizenship is still jus sanguinis, by birth.

      Legitimacy from physical control and electoral choice. A nation state’s legitimacy
        comes from a few sources. First, the state needs to be good enough at violence to
        actually control the territory it claims. Second, but really secondarily, the state
        is supposedly legitimized by the support of their underlying nation and their
        demonstrated respect for universal human rights. (It’s unfortunately a secondary
        point because any group that is in de facto control of territory for long enough

204
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    203


        eventually gets recognized.) Ideally, a legitimate state reflects the will of its
        people while also respecting the rights of the individual – giving voice to the
        masses and the minority alike.

      Centralized administration. The administrators of the state, frequently an exec-
        utive and a legislature, write laws on paper to specify what is mandatory and
        forbidden. These laws are typically interpreted by a judiciary and enforced by
        men with guns. And in the nation state system, every piece of land is adminis-
        tered by exactly one state, regardless of who is on it.

      Domestic monopoly of violence. Each state keeps order within its borders through
        a police force. Citizens who defy the law are subject to increasing levels of violence
        until they comply, as per Grand Theft Auto.

      International sovereignty via military. In principle, states aren’t supposed to
        interfere with the domestic affairs of other states. In practice, a state only main-
        tains sovereignty if it is competent enough in defending against domestic and
        foreign rivals alike, via its police, intelligence agencies, and military.

      Diplomatic recognition via bilateral and multilateral fora. States may sign bilat-
        eral agreements with each other, or they may be recognized by multilateral fora
        like the UN, the World Trade Organization (WTO), the International Monetary
        Fund (IMF), and the G-20. Diplomatic recognition is a matter of both politics
        and paperwork, and the lack of recognition can isolate a state and/or its citizens.

      Treaties manage cooperation and constraint. A set of cross-border compacts at-
        tempt to govern interstate interaction and limit abuses, promising things like hu-
        man rights and freedom of movement — declarations that are frequently flouted.

      Pax Americana. Finally, while it was not always so, the guarantor of the cur-
        rent nation state system is the USA, which is where the UN is headquartered,
        and which purports to “provide global leadership” and “champion the rules-based
        international order.” All other states must hope that this guarantor of the rules-
        based order doesn’t decide to invade, surveil, sanction, strafe, or otherwise desta-
        bilize them.

These cover the six essential parts of the state: borders, population, central govern-
ment, international sovereignty, diplomatic recognition, and the domestic monopoly on
violence.


5.2.3 The Nation State as a Term

Understanding the term “nation state” requires us to distinguish the nation (a group
of people with common descent, history, culture, or language) from the state (their
government). They are not the same.

Even though “nation” is often conflated with “state,” the term “nation state” has two
words for a reason. The first word (nation) has the same etymological root as “natality.”

205
204                      CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



It once denoted a group of people with shared ancestry. The second word (state) refers
to the entity that governs these people, that commands the police and the military, and
that holds the monopoly of violence over the geographic area that the nation inhabits.
In a sense, the nation and the state are as different as labor and management in a
factory. The former are the masses and the latter are the elite.

The textbook nation state is something like Japan, in which a single group with shared
ancestry and culture (the Japanese) occupies a clearly delineated territory (the islands
of Japan) and is ruled by a clear sovereign (the Japanese government) which is repre-
sentative of the people in some sense (originally via the divine, contemporaneously via
the Diet).


5.2.4 Micronations and Multinations

This gives us a new perspective on why micronations like Sealand don’t work: they
start backwards, from the territory and the government, rather than working forwards
from a people and their culture. The latter process is how nation states historically
emerged: a state was set up by a nation to govern it, not vice versa. . . though then that
self-same state often began the process of assimilating others into its founding nation,
so it was a bidirectional process.

Bidirectionality notwithstanding, the egg of the nation precedes the chicken of the state.
From this perspective, a better term than micronation is really microstate, because it’s
not a micro-nation unless it represents a small group of aligned people. A single person
self-proclaiming a government is just a tiny state. As the saying goes, you and what
army? Without a nation, there is no army - and no legitimacy.1

On the other side of the spectrum is an empire, or multination. The Roman Empire, the
Ottoman Empire, and the Soviet Empire contained many nations and ethnic groups.

This vantage point allows us to rectify more vocabulary. The concept of a multi-
national corporation, for example, is something of a misnomer; the right term is a
multi-state corporation (which operates across polities), as opposed to amulti-national
state (which manages the affairs of many different ethnic groups within its boundaries).


5.2.5 0-nation, 1-nation, N-nations

In between 0-nation microstates and N-nation empires are 1-nation states, governments
that are set up to manage the affairs of a single ethnic group in a defined territory. How-
ever, while this kind of terminology is not exactly deprecated, it’s a bit old-fashioned.
It’s not how we tend to talk about nation states in the current year.

    1To be clear, even if the goal is to gain the minimum necessary sovereignty gradually and peacefully
- which we strongly recommend! - the founder of a startup society will need an “army” in the sense
that Gandhi had an “army.” That means a large group of people committed to building their network
state. It’s a collective LARP, not just one person daydreaming to themselves.

206
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    205


First, today we often discuss multiethnic states —multinations, like the USA — which
are really more like the empires of yore than a classical monoethnic nation state. Sec-
ond, many contend that physical borders don’t matter in the age of the internet. Third,
modern discourse focuses to amuch greater extent on proposition nations, where shared
ideas are the organizing principle rather than shared inheritance. Fourth, and most
importantly, conflict between ethnic groups within states can result in civil war, mass
deportation, totalitarian brainwashing, ethnic cleansing, forced conversion, and cul-
tural destruction, the kind of process that recently resulted in the formations of East
Timor and South Sudan.

Later, we’ll talk about how network states address these issues, but these are the (un-
derstandable!) reasons why the distinction between the nation and the state has fallen
out of favor. Scholars don’t want to inadvertently encourage separatism or irredentism
or worse, lest people think it’s not a real nation state unless the political entity (the
state) represents all the members of a single ethnicity (the nation) in all the lands
around the world where they preponderate.

Or at least, they don’t want to do so domestically. Because the average American is
a bit schizophrenic when it comes to terminology like this. He can easily understand
the desire of, say, the Ukrainian people to break free of the Russian empire, or for the
Tibetan nation to have their own government separate from the Chinese state, or for
the Persian people to distinguish themselves from the theocracy of Iran. But the same
person is typically more skeptical that Britain should have exited the European Union,
let alone that the “Texan nation” should have its own sovereign state.

The cynical might say that national aspirations get airtime in proportion to the national
interest; the more cynical might say that even the term “national interest” is yet another
misnomer, because it’s more like the “state’s interest” given that the American state
rules more than one nation. This, however, leads us to the key question of what exactly
constitutes a nation.


5.2.6 What is a Nation?

This question was once all-important: what groups are significant enough to be called
nations, candidates for a state of their own? It will soon be all-important again, as
important as “what is a currency,” and for similar reasons: because Bitcoin, web3, the
metaverse, remote work, mobile, and the internet allow people to exit legacy arrange-
ments and form new groups more easily than at any time in the recent past. But which
of these groups should be considered a “nation”?


A Definitional Approach

Let’s start with Oxford’s definition by way of their free service Lexico:

        A large body of people united by common descent, history, culture, or
        language, inhabiting a particular country or territory.

207
206                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


From that definition, we can extract the following properties:

      A large body of people: has to be of a substantial size (10-100k+?)

      united : members see themselves as being part of the same group.

      common descent: shared genetics, have intermarried more with each other than
        people outside the nation.

      (or) history: shared past, have lived near each other for some time.

      (or) culture: shared dress, food, mannerisms, religion, and/or customs.

      (or) language: shared spoken and/or written tongue.

      inhabiting a particular. . . territory: found in a specific region of the globe.

Each of these pieces can be poked at. How large is “large”? How do we measure whether
a group of people is united? How localized to a particular territory does a nation have
to be, or can it be nomadic? And why do we have a complex “OR” statement buried
in the middle, where common descent, history, culture, or language all figure in? Our
first instinct is that the definition of a nation is a little fuzzy, and our instinct is right.


An Empirical Approach

To ground our discussion, let’s go through specific examples of groups that have been
called nations:

      The Japanese: They line up with the definition perfectly. The Japanese at one
        point did have quite an empire, and there is a Japanese diaspora in the US
        (and Brazil). . . but most people of Japanese ancestry live on the islands of Japan,
        speak the Japanese language, are governed by the Japanese state, and live in an
        essentially monoethnic polity.

      The Spanish: They have a nation state today, but in the past they had an
        international empire that then contracted, leaving them mostly to themselves
        on the Iberian Peninsula. They left behind a global footprint in the form of 20
        countries that speak Spanish, yet do not consider themselves part of the Spanish
        nation state.

      The Turks: They are a multiethnic state today that is also the successor to an
        even larger empire, the Ottoman Empire, with a definitionally Byzantine history.

      The Israelis: Their status as a nation state changed with time. The Jewish people
        were once a stateless nation, a diasporic group united by common ancestry and
        tradition without a land or government to call their own. Then, within living
        memory, they founded the state of Israel. (Herzl’s work is a major inspiration for
        this book.)

      The Catalonians, the Kurds, and the Palestinians: Of course, for every Spain,
        Israel, or Turkey, there is a Catalonia, a Palestine, a Kurdistan — namely a group

208
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    207


        that self-identifies as a nation and feels its national aspirations have been denied.
        These are stateless nations, as distinct from nation states, without necessarily
        endorsing any particular cause.

      The Irish: They now have an independent Ireland, but famously didn’t for many
        years under the British. A controversial issue is whether Northern Ireland should
        be part of the Republic of Ireland, or part of the UK.

      The Taiwanese: This group is recognized as a nation by some parties but by no
        means all. We can think of these as partially sovereign nations, with a measure
        of control over their own state and territory, but less than they’d like.

      The Americans, the Singaporeans, and the French: These states have tried, with
        varying success, to craft a common identity as a “nation” from the raw material of
        several different ethnic groups. Indeed, the Americans have, by some measures,
        been very successful in this effort — at least for a time. The Americans, the
        Singaporeans, and the French are explicitly proposition nations.

      The Chinese and the Indians: These gigastates are not really single-nation states
        given the sheer multiplicity of different groups within each country’s borders.
        However, those different groups didn’t all recently arrive next to each other like a
        Burning Man encampment. They’ve been living alongside each other for centuries
        in a common civilization, with greater and lesser levels of past unification, so
        the grouping is more “Lindy” than more recent multiethnic states with less of a
        long-term track record, let alone the wholly arbitrary states left in the wake of
        colonialism. Some have used the term civilization state for these entities. You
        might even stretch this to encompass the European Union, though it is more of a
        transnational bureaucracy than an entity that celebrates European civilization.

And for many Middle Eastern and African countries, the states don’t really reflect the
underlying nations at all. A clue here is the presence of horizontal or vertical lines
on a map, lines that don’t reflect the organic physical (deserts, mountains, rivers) and
cultural (languages, marriages, religions) barriers that help define nations. Many of
these “imposed states” are a parting gift from colonial empires.

From these examples, we can already see quite a bit of variation:

      nations with states (Japanese, Spanish)

      nations without states (Kurds, Catalonians)

      nations with partially sovereign states (Taiwan)

      multiethnic states that are trying to create proposition nations (America, Singa-
        pore, France)

      imposed multiethnic states that don’t even have a proposition to bind them (many
        “states” formed as shotgun marriages in the aftermath of European colonialism)

209
208                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


      civilization states that are multiethnic, but have long-standing cultural ties that
        unify their constituent nations (China, India)

Just by touring this topic, we also see that the issue of “what is a nation” is still the hot
button, the third rail, the pulse raiser, the argument starter. Because a nation granted
legitimacy can claim territory and erect a polity, while a nation denied recognition
remains landless and stateless, the stakes couldn’t be higher for this seemingly abstract
question.


A Philosophical Approach

We just did some specific examples. Can we enunciate general principles that define
which groups should be considered bona fide nations? Many scholars from the past to
the recent present have taken a crack at this question.

Here’s a necessarily incomplete précis of their views, taken in part from Benner’s chapter
here and Kaufmann’s review here. First, the thinkers of the late 1700s and 1800s,
writing during the American Revolution, the Napoleonic Wars, or the Revolutions of
1848:

      Rousseau: if a group of people voluntarily consents to being bound by the same
        governing authority, they are a nation.

      Marx: a nation is a convenient group supported by a Great Power to destabilize
        a rival. Regarding communism, the nation is a group to lead to acquire political
        supremacy and a boundary to transcend to unite the proletariat.

      Locke: if two groups lay claim to the same territory, the more “rational and
        industrious” should be considered a nation.

      John Stuart Mill: if a group consents to the same governing authority, and is
        capable of attaining control over a piece of land, they should be considered a
        nation. Mill’s concept of utility, however, trumps consent.

      Hegel: a nation is formed by its institutions imbuing a sense of shared ethics.
        War tests that ethical duty and is not inherently evil, but a natural condition of
        anarchic interstate relations.

      JG Herder: If a group shares language and descent, it is a nation, a concept
        known as primordialism. Moreover, small nations should be independent from
        larger nations that want to assimilate them into different languages.

      JG Fichte: like Herder, separate languages and ethnicities define separate nations.
        Moreover, a state can build a nation through education, guiding the populace
        towards a shared cultural and linguistic identity.

      Ernest Renan: a nation is those with “common glories” and sacrifices in the
        past and “the will to continue them in the present.” The existence of a nation

210
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    209


        is represented by a “daily plebiscite” that constitutes the present consent of a
        people.

      Ernest Gellner: nations are peoples sharing (via schooling) language, culture,
        and forms of communication particularly adapted to modern society.

      Benedict Anderson: nations are just social constructs, imagined communities,
        based on linguistic connections driven by “print capitalism.”

      Eric Hobsbawm: nations must have a historic association with a current state,
        a long-established linguocultural administrative elite, and a proven capacity for
        conquest.

These definitions both overlap and conflict. Some tensions include:

      Primordialism vs propositionism. A nation can be a group with shared ancestry,
        culture, and language, but it can also be based purely on ideas and voluntary
        association.

      Scale vs uniqueness. A nation needs sufficient scale to be able to defend itself, so
        it should adopt a broad definition of national membership. But it needs to also
        avoid becoming so assimilated into a large-scale group that there’s no distinct
        culture to defend.

      Self-determination vs external sponsorship. A nation is based in part on self-
        identification as a nation, but in practice needs to also be capable of delivering
        real world results (being “rational and industrious”) and of attracting the support
        of a Great Power patron.

      Imagined communities vs real linguocultural ties. A nation is an imagined com-
        munity and a social construct, but it needs to share enough of the same language
        and culture to feasibly assemble that construct.

These divergences mean there isn’t yet a single test for whether a group is a nation,
though one can make a more or less persuasive case in any given instance by appealing
to different standards. However, with modern tools, we might be able to tidy up that
fuzziness. Later in this chapter, we’ll introduce a computational approach to defining
a nation that complements the empirical and philosophical approaches. And we’ll talk
about how these theories of national origin influence a startup society founder’s strategy
for “customer acquisition,” or in this case citizen acquisition.

But for now, what is a nation? Perhaps it’s just a group that can convince enough
other people that it’s a nation.


5.2.7 What is a State?

It’s also worth spending time on the other half of the nation state definition: what
exactly is a state?

211
210                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



The Definitional Approach

This helpful video enumerates six properties of a state:

    1. Border: a clearly defined territory

    2. Population: one or more nations that live within that territory

    3. Central government: the ability to create laws

    4. Interstate sovereignty: in theory, control over domestic affairs without interfer-
        ence by other states

    5. Recognition: diplomatic recognition by other states

    6. Domestic monopoly on violence: the ability to maintain order inside the territory

A failed state in the midst of civil war wouldn’t fit, for example, because it wouldn’t
be able to prevent foreign powers from interfering (item 4), nor would it be able to
control violence domestically (item 6). A micronation doesn’t count because it lacks
territory (item 1) and population (item 2). And an administrative subdivision of the
US like Arkansas also wouldn’t count, because it lacks recognition by foreign states
(item 5) and control relative to Washington, D.C. (item 3). However, a subdivision
can sometimes become an independent state.


The Comparative Approach

How about a comparison? Precisely because they’re so often conflated, it’s worth
addressing in detail just how a state differs from a nation.

      The state is a political and legal entity, while a nation is a cultural, ethnic, and
        psychological identity.

      The state is bound by laws and threat of force, while a nation is bound by
        sentiments and linguistic/genetic/cultural alignment.

      The state is top-down and hierarchical, while the nation is bottom-up and peer-
        to-peer.

      And, as above, the state has a fixed territory, a government and sovereignty over
        a territory, while a nation typically has shared language, culture, and/or ancestry.

Nations may not always have a single state. The Kurds lack a state, while the Koreans
are split into two states. Conversely, states may govern one or more nations. The
British state governs the English, Welsh, Scottish, and Irish nations, while the Soviet
state governed more than 100 different nationalities.

While some contend that the distinction between nation and state is an intrinsically
European idea, there are actually different words for these concepts across languages.

212
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    211



The Pragmatic Approach

Perhaps the simplest test for whether something is a bona fide state is whether it’s a
member of the United Nations General Assembly. Does it have sufficient diplomatic
recognition? Is it considered a state by other entities we’d consider states? In a word,
is it recognized ? This is important because even the very largest groups of people, like
the Chinese and the Indians, are outnumbered by the rest of the world; social viability
is necessary for state viability.

A couple of excellent books on this topic are Invisible Countries and Not on the
Map, which review edge cases like Nagorno-Karabakh, Abkhazia, Transnistria, North-
ern Cyprus, Somaliland, South Ossetia, and the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic,
Kosovo, and Taiwan. Each of these entities has a greater or lesser degree of internal
state-like-ness, with Taiwan being the most legit, but all of them lack some degree of
full interstate recognition — often due to a powerful regional or global opponent.

While we’re discussing the UN, a better name than the “United Nations” might be
the “Selected States.” After all, many stateless nations don’t have a seat in the United
Nations General Assembly, like the Kurds, the Catalonians, or the Tibetans. And many
countries that do have seats are more akin to multinational empires than single-nation
states.


The Philosophical Approach

Keynes said “Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any in-
tellectual influences, are usually the slaves of some defunct economist.” Meaning, if
you don’t know what intellectual software you’re running, you’re probably running it
unconsciously. So, it’s hard to survey the many thinkers that led to the modern state,
because we don’t always understand the full scope of their impact.

We’ll try anyway. Here’s another necessarily imprecise set of summaries of what dif-
ferent political theorists thought about the state.

      Plato: the state should make possible the conditions under which everyone can
        provide for themselves and seek the Good.

      Aristotle: all communities aim at some good, and the state is the highest kind of
        community, aiming at the highest of goods.

      Locke: The state is legitimate if it enforces contracts and acts as the guarantor
        of private property.

      Carlyle: The state should be run by a hero that provides order.

      Schmitt: The state embodies a clear friend-enemy distinction.

      Marx: The state is meant to organize the proletariat against the ruling class.

      Keynes: The state should intervene to smooth the business cycle and support full
        employment.

213
212                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


      Rawls: The state distributes social goods and economic opportunities equally to
        its free citizens according to the theory of justice as fairness.

      Hobbes: The state possess absolute authority, and this powerful Leviathan makes
        anti-social men behave in pro-social ways.

      Rousseau: The state is legitimate if people have consented to a “Social Contract”
        in which they self-rule and ideally do not abdicate sovereignty to potentially
        disaligned representatives.

      Samuelson: The state is meant to provide public goods that private actors would
        not be able to supply.

      Lee Kuan Yew: The state should provide its people with the maximum enjoyment
        of freedoms and respect the family unit. The state should embrace multiple
        nations yet demand loyalty.


Statecraft Strategies and Programming Paradigms

Again, this isn’t just desiccated theory. It’s important to understand these ideas be-
cause they are used implicitly or explicitly by the founders and leaders of actually
existing states.

From a computer science standpoint, these schools of thought are statecraft strategies
that are analogous to programming paradigms. That is, you can often solve the same
problem from (say) an object-oriented, functional, or imperative standpoint. But cer-
tain problems are easier to tackle with a particular paradigm, while others become
much harder.

So too for these varying theories of the state. Moreover, rather than being used in
isolation, these statecraft strategies are often fused within a single legal codebase, much
as different programming paradigms can complement each other within a company’s
codebase.

For example, Karl Marx’s zero-sum worldview made it easy to justify a Soviet state
with a massive Red Army to destroy the capitalist oppressors. Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s
writing by contrast didn’t give much justification for the use of force itself, but furnished
a vision of consensual communistic utopia that sat just on the other side of the Red
Army’s liberating violence. Carl Schmitt and Thomas Carlyle are a roughly equivalent
pairing on the right, with Schmitt advocating that a hero use state force against the
enemy and Carlyle talking up the bounteous order that would arise as a result.

Marx and Rousseau’s failure mode was their departure from economic reality, as they
didn’t take into account self-interest. Schmitt and Carlyle’s failure mode was their
departure from political reality, as they didn’t take into account the interests of the
other guy. But their statecraft strategies were once influential enough to drive some
of the most powerful states in world history, so we need to understand them, even if
we must also discard them. Think about how PHP is a programming language that

214
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    213


“sucks” according to many engineers, yet somehow led to many of the most popular
apps of all time (Facebook, WordPress, Slack, etc), and you’ll get the point.

It is also possible to run completely in another direction, and have a purely contractual
state run on an implicitly Hayekian/Lockean paradigm, maximizing some measure of
wealth without any of the meaning that the Marxist or Schmittian state narratives
provide. That also has its vulnerabilities, as a vacuum of meaning can be filled by
a rival whose statecraft strategy involves constant evangelism; this is why the Pla-
tonic/Aristotlean state narratives have a good point when they prioritize purpose.

The strengths and weaknesses of various statecraft strategies can be discussed at length,
and we’ll return to this topic. But for now: before you design your ideal state, you
should have some idea of what others thought their ideal state to be, and how that
worked out.


5.2.8 What does a Nation State look like on a Map?

The simple answer is that a nation state is a colored blob on a map. But we can think
of that map as a superposition of various underlying maps showing where members of
the nation are located — for example, where the speakers of the language, those with
shared alleles, and those with similar culture reside, overlaid on the legal boundaries
of the state).

Again, Japan is our canonical example. The underlying maps all line up. Most speakers
of the Japanese language, most people with Japanese ancestry, most holders of the
Japanese yen, most practitioners of Shintoism, and most people who are culturally
Japanese live in the islands of Japan administered by the Japanese government.

Other nations are much messier than that.

      Some nations have spread fractally around a territory, as in the Balkans.

      Some nations have spread around the world, as did the Jewish community pre-
        Israel (still true to a significant extent today).

      Some previously unified nations have been split between territories for historical
        reasons, as are North and South Korea.

      Other nations are defined by multiple overlapping maps, because one variable
        alone is not enough to delimit them. For example, if you just said that all people
        who speak Spanish are members of the Spanish nation, you would misclassify
        millions of people across continents who do not think of themselves as part of the
        same community.

      Some “nation states,” like Indonesia, have odd-looking boundaries — in part,
        because they are really multinational states.

      Some “nation states,” like France and the United Kingdom, have surprisingly
        distributed global footprints because they are really the remains of multinational

215
214                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        empires.

In general, the idealized nation state is one where the members of a given group —
the nation — are physically centralized within a single bounded set on the surface of
the globe. That may seem trivial, but later in this chapter we’ll explore physically
decentralized polities in the context of network states.


5.2.9 How were Modern Nation States Founded?

There are a few different angles on the question of how nation states get founded.


The Historical Angle

The first angle is to think about when many states were founded on roughly the same
principles at the same time. We can define a few critical moments in history.

      WW2 and Cold War (1945-1991): today’s states were founded under the aegis
        of the postwar order. After World War II, within Europe large-scale population
        transfers created monoethnic states. Meanwhile, outside Europe, the colonies
        owned by Western European powers experienced “decolonization” and then ar-
        guably “recolonization” by the USSR or USA respectively in the name of commu-
        nism or capitalism. Another clutch of independent states arose after the collapse
        of the USSR in 1991.

      American Revolution, French Revolution, Great Divergence (1776-1800s): Writ-
        ers like Benedict Anderson date the rise of European nationalism in its modern
        sense to the “Great Divergence” of the early 1800s, after the French Revolution,
        which was in turn inspired by the American Revolution.

      30 Years War, Spanish/Dutch War, and Peace of Westphalia (1618-1648): The
        Peace of Westphalia ended the 30 Years War between Protestants and Catholics
        that had been kicked off by the Reformation, and ushered in the concept of states
        with bounded territorial sovereignty as opposed to the unbounded authority of
        the Catholic Church.

      Rise of mapmaking and print capitalism (1500s): The rise of mapmaking tech-
        nologies enabled the creation of accurate maps. We take this for granted today,
        but without good maps there were no explicit borders beyond terrain, only grad-
        ual diminishment of the power of one sovereign as its territory bled into that of
        another.

      Ancient era. Civilization states like China and India date their origins back to
        antiquity, and can point to certain continuities of language, culture, and religious
        practice.

      Prehistory. Primordialists argue that the nations that underpin states predate
        written history, as their linguistic, genetic, and cultural bonds stretch back thou-
        sands of years. In other words, nations are naturally occurring phenomena, more

216
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    215


        like the periodic table of the elements than a social construct, with boundaries
        that are obvious in a Potterian sense. Any real modern nation state was in this
        sense founded millennia ago.

Importantly, the whole world didn’t get modern nation states at the same time. For
example, Westphalian sovereignty was initially established within Western Europe, but
not outside it. European nation states were supposed to honor each others’ borders, in
principle at least, so they went abroad to conquer other places.

But these junction points in history are still useful ways to think about the founding of
nation states, with one or the other looming larger depending on whether one is more
focused on the “nation,” the “state,” or the “nation state” combination.

From a practical standpoint, clearly you can’t found a civilization state like China or
India without thousands of years of history. But you might be able to distill a new
“nation” like the Mormons (est: 1830) from the mass of Americans, or alternatively
architect an impressive new nation state like “E”-stonia (est: 1991) from the same
nation oppressed by the dreary Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic.


The Patronage Angle

An alternative approach is to look at the details of how specific nation states were
founded. One thing that pops out to us when studying enough of these histories is that
national independence is not solely a matter of self-determination, because the fate of
many nations is not determined wholly by their own efforts.

For example, the Soviets were “anti-imperialist” when that meant getting Western-
sympathetic capitalists out, and Soviet-sympathetic communists in. The French sup-
ported the fledgling American nation when that meant poking a thumb in the eye of
their British rivals. And today’s Americans haven’t been too vocal on the Kurds or
Yemenis given their alliances with the Turkish and Saudi states, but are extremely
enthusiastic about the Ukrainians, Taiwanese, and Uighurs given their conflicts with
the Russian and Chinese states.

As such, to achieve its ambitions a stateless nation may also need a patron, a kind of
venture capitalist Great Power. Self-determination is not enough.


The Military Angle

Many countries were founded within living memory, but because they were often
founded by force, some don’t believe it’s possible to found new countries without force.

Or is it? They say you cannot found a Pentagon; they don’t say you can’t found a
competitor to the post office, or the taxi medallion system, or to NASA. They instead
go right to the thing where we don’t have comparably recent foundings. . . or do we?
After all, the Pentagon itself was built by human beings just like you and me in 1943.
India, Israel, and Singapore were likewise founded in 1947, 1948, and 1965 respectively,
and have their own defense department equivalents.

217
216                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


Of course, there are other interpretations of this challenge. It could mean “OK, it
happened a while ago, but I don’t think the Pentagon-forming process can be repeated,”
or perhaps “It would be bad to raise amassive new army, as that would be destabilizing,”
or even, “Come on, you can’t found the most powerful military in the world from
scratch.” But answering these kinds of questions presents an embedded Catch-22.
Either someone thinking about starting new countries must want to create a powerful
new military (dangerous!) or else they don’t have any guns and will get crushed by
those that do (dangerously naive).

One answer is that you don’t need to get full sovereignty but can instead contract
with an existing sovereign for defense. In fact, this is that this is actually what most
“real” countries already do — few truly have full sovereignty, as most contract out their
defense in a similar manner way to the US or (nowadays) China.

Another answer is that you could write a book just on this (and perhaps we’ll need to
add another chapter), but for a fundamentally digital entity with physical decentral-
ization around the world, the primary mode will be nonviolent digital defense through
secrecy, pseudonymity, decentralization, and encryption. In different ways, Google and
Bitcoin protect many millions of people’s digital footprint without an enormous army.



5.2.10 Why were Nation States Founded?

Another way of asking this is: what came before the nation state?

The short answer is that people had different identity stacks. In Europe, the populace
didn’t think of themselves as all being primarily “French” or “German” till much later
on. They instead thought of themselves on the basis of their feudal lord or region
(Brittany, Prussia) or religion (e.g., Protestant/Catholic). Transnational entities like
the Catholic Church also claimed dominion over all believers, no matter where they
might be, so there was a question as to whether Pope or King had ultimate authority
in any given jurisdiction. Wars ensued.

The Peace of Westphalia in 1648 resolved these issues and is considered by many to
be the origin of the European nation state. The Westphalian peace divided territory
by lines on a map. Over each territory thus delineated, there was a government that
represented the people in that territory, with the right to exercise force on their behalf.
And these “sovereign” states were supposed to leave each other alone.

In theory, the state was meant to be an innovation in violence reduction. You stay
in your lane, I stay in mine. Clear sovereigns would keep domestic order, and the
principle of national sovereignty would deter aggression from abroad. It didn’t entirely
work out like that, of course; both intrastate and interstate conflict still occurred. But
the abstraction of nation states may still have been preferable to the preceding era of
fuzzy bordered empires and conflicting sovereigns.

218
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                    217



5.2.11 How does a Nation State Expand and Contract?

There are at least four ways a nation state expands:

      Demographically. By reproduction or immigration. A nation grows when it sees
        more birth than death. A state grows when one of its constituent nations expe-
        riences demographic growth, or when it adds immigrants, which may be from a
        different nation. Note that there can be a difference here between expansion of
        the state and the nation!

      Geographically. By conquest (e.g., Ivan the Terrible’s expansion of Russia), by
        acquisition (e.g., the Louisiana Purchase), or by agreement (e.g., Singapore’s
        involuntary separation from Malaysia).

      Economically. By trade and opening of markets. This is not always peaceful: see
        the British East India Company, Smedley Butler, and the Opium Wars.

      Ideologically. By education and conversion. Revolutionary France invested heav-
        ily in educating all citizens to speak French, expanding the self-identified French
        nation. Similarly, Christian, Muslim, and Communist groups spent immense ef-
        fort on evangelism. Of course, while some of this evangelism grows the support
        base of a nation state (like Maoism did for the PRC and arguably Wahhabism
        did for Saudi Arabia), other kinds of viral ideas cut across the boundaries of state
        and nation alike in destabilizing ways.


5.2.12 How did States Influence Nations, and Vice Versa?

Nation state formation is bidirectional; nations create states which influence nations,
and so on. While a nation must come first, many of history’s most successful nation
states drew adjacent (and then non-adjacent) people into the founding population by
means ranging from cultural appeal to rape and pillage.

Prior to Garibaldi, only about 2.5% of “Italians” spoke what we now know as Ital-
ian, but what was then the Florentine dialect of Italian. Similarly, before the French
Revolution, less than 50% of France spoke today’s official variety of French. And un-
til Bismarck’s unification of Germany, there was rivalry between Prussia and Austria
(“German dualism”) for exactly how and whether a “Germany” should be formed.

A related phenomenon is the feedback loop between political borders and national
culture. The 38th parallel didn’t have pre-existing historical significance in Korean
culture, but after the Korean War the rate of intermarriage between the new “North
Korean” and “South Korean” groups plummeted. This state of affairs has persisted for
70 years; the longer it continues, the larger the cultural gap between the two groups.

Hard political boundaries of this kind serve much the same purpose as natural physical
boundaries in the past like rivers, mountains, and deserts. They impede allelic and
cultural diffusion, and thus contribute to nation-forming dynamics. There’s a feedback
loop between the political/territorial and the linguistic/genetic/cultural.

219
218                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



5.2.13 What is not a Nation State?

What is not a nation state? I don’t mean this in the trivial way that a banana is not
a nation state. I mean, what is another large-scale way of organizing people in the
physical world that is not a nation state?

Put another way, to understand what something is, we need to understand what it
is not. We live in a world of nation states, so conceptualizing something different is
difficult. The ideal counterexamples are things that are close, but not quite there. Here
are a few:

    1. Multiethnic empires like the Soviet Union were not traditional nation states be-
        cause they had more than one nationality within their boundaries.

    2. Stateless nations like the Kurds are not nation states because they lack a formally
        recognized territory and government.

    3. Transnational movements like the Catholic Church are not nation states because
        the set of all believers is not contained within a territorial state that it administers.
        (The Church does have Vatican City, but that is about as ceremonial as the
        British Royal Family.)

    4. Terrorist groups like ISIS which operate across borders and have seized territory
        at times aren’t considered states because they lack diplomatic recognition (due to
        their heinous crimes!). That said, the Soviet Communists were the ISIS of their
        day, and they just had to hold out 16 years for FDR to recognize them, so with
        enough persistence this designation can change.

    5. Nomadic tribes like the Romani and Masai are not nation states, because they
        migrate between countries. Indeed, most of humanity used to live like this, with
        farming/soldiering being a relatively recent innovation, and we may return to
        something like it with the advent of digital nomadism.

    6. Multijurisdictional corporations like Google have more people on their servers
        than most countries, and do control huge chunks of their users’ lives, such as
        their messages and balances. However, they are a transitional form towards our
        concept of the network state, as their users lack the national consciousness of a
        nation and their governance lacks the qualities we’ve come to expect from a state.

    7. Ethnic diasporas like the Japanese or Armenian diasporas are not nation states.
        They may have business districts, and some degree of community organization
        in those regions, but they are just a tendril of a nation rather than a full nation,
        and certainly lack the properties of a full state.

    8. Local clans like the Pashtun and Hazara of Afghanistan are not nation states.
        They are different nations within a failed state.

    9. Supranational entities like the European Union, WTO, or IMF are also not nation
        states, and are more similar to the Catholic Church in terms of their cross-

220
5.2. ON NATION STATES                                                                                                219



         jurisdictional influence.2



5.2.14 What Technological Developments underpin the Modern
                  Nation State System?

We don’t typically think of mapmaking, printing, and shooting as novel activities,
because the underlying technologies were invented so many generations ago. But they
were each foundational to our modern concept of states with borders, where men with
guns enforce written laws.

    1. Mapmaking. It’s only possible to have a map of the world which we divide into
         nation states if we have a map of the world. You don’t have to be a cartographic
         connoisseur to know that such a map did not exist in 1492, when Columbus sailed
         the ocean blue in search of an India to trade with. “Ye olde” maps with “here be
         dragons” had to be painstakingly crafted. Prior to modern GPS, there was an
         enormous tech stack around mapmaking, including compasses, telescopes, and
         celestial navigation.

    2. Printing. Not just the printing press, but the entire practice of print capitalism
         helped give rise to the nation state. Just as Facebook and Google wanted everyone
         on the internet so they could expand their customer base, the new commercial
         printers of the 1500s wanted everyone to speak the same language so they could
         maximize sales for their goods.

    3. Shooting. “God made men, but Sam Colt made them equal.” Feudalism was
         enforced by horseback-riding knights in shining armor with heavy swords; guns
         changed that. Others have written about the transition to the gun age, but in
         short, guns reduced the importance of physical inequality. Any man (or, even-
         tually, woman) with a gun could kill any other man, even if the shooter was old
         and frail and the shootee was Sir Lancelot himself. The advent of firearms (and
         crossbows, and cannons) destabilized the feudal hierarchy; a strong right arm was
         suddenly worth less than a strong left brain, as the technology and supply chain
         required to produce muskets was suddenly worth more. The gun helped catalyze
         the transition from feudal hierarchy to nationalist republic and helped promote
         the “republican” ideals of the American and French Revolutions.

So: a combination of mapmaking, printing, and shooting helped set the stage for the
post-Westphalian nation state, where a map delimited borders, a printed document
established the law, and a guy with a gun shot you for crossing those borders or
breaking the law.


    2El Salvador’s adoption of Bitcoin in contravention of IMF dictates is, in its own way, similar to a
Protestant state flipping the bird to the Catholic Church.

221
220                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



5.3 On Network States

The network state system starts from different assumptions than the nation state sys-
tem (which you can review here).


5.3.1 What is a Network State?


















Earlier we gave descriptions of the network state in one sentence, one thousand words,
and one essay. We also showed what a million-person version looks like on a map (see
above). Here’s that one sentence definition again:

        A network state is a social network with a moral innovation, a sense of na-
        tional consciousness, a recognized founder, a capacity for collective action,
        an in-person level of civility, an integrated cryptocurrency, a consensual gov-
        ernment limited by a social smart contract, an archipelago of crowdfunded
        physical territories, a virtual capital, and an on-chain census that proves
        a large enough population, income, and real estate footprint to attain a
        measure of diplomatic recognition.

Keep in mind that this definition references the final form of a diplomatically recognized
network state. But you can’t get diplomatic recognition for a made-up country right
off the bat, so you can’t found a network state directly.

Instead, you found a startup society and hope to scale it into a network state that
achieves diplomatic recognition from a pre-existing government, just as you don’t found
a public company directly, but instead found a startup company and hope to scale it into
a public company that achieves “diplomatic recognition” from a pre-existing exchange
like the NASDAQ.

Moreover, to extend the analogy, the process of scaling a startup involves waypoints -
like “seed startup,” “series B startup,” and “unicorn” - prior to achieving the status of a

222
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               221


public company. So too there are at least two waypoints between startup society and
network state worth noting: the network union and the network archipelago.

Turning a startup society into a network union makes it a digital community capable of
collective action. Turning that network union into a network archipelago manifests that
collective action in the real world, as the community crowdfunds physical properties
around the world and connects them via the internet. Finally, an impressive enough
network archipelago can achieve diplomatic recognition from an existing government,
thereby becoming a true network state.


The Definition

That’s the process of getting to a network state. Now let’s drill into each part of our
proposed definition.

      A social network. The people of a network state form their nation online. Social
        rather than geographic proximity is the core organizing principle. But this isn’t
        a typical social network like Facebook or Twitter; it’s what we call a 1-network
        where there is just one coherent community present, rather than many separate
        communities as on Facebook or Twitter. It’s not quite a complete graph - everyone
        doesn’t have to be friends with every single other node - but it’s much closer to
        that than a typical social network.

        Admission to this social network is selective, people can lose their account privi-
        leges for bad behavior, and everyone who’s there has explicitly opted in by apply-
        ing to join. That application process could involve public proof of alignment via
        writing, a career history that demonstrates common values, or the investment of
        time and energy into the society to obtain digital assets. Joining the network that
        underpins a network state is not a purely economic proposition, not something
        that can be bought with money alone. It’s a concrete version of Rousseau’s social
        contract as a literal smart contract, one that all sign before entering, a way to
        turn an abstract proposition into an actual nation.

      A moral innovation. A network state grows out of a startup society that is
        premised on a moral innovation, where everyone within the society thinks some
        principle X is good that the rest of the world thinks is bad, or vice versa. This is
        the proposition part of a proposition nation. For example, the moral innovation
        could be as trivial-seeming as “sugar bad” or “24/7 internet bad”, or as heavy-
        weight as “this traditional religion is good”. The moral innovation draws people
        in. It gives a reason for the society to exist, a purpose that’s distinct from the
        outside world, a universalist complement to the particularist sense of national
        consciousness, an ideological mission that others will nod their heads at even if
        they don’t share (“ok, I understand why someone might want a sugar-free society,
        or a Benedict Option community”).

        The reason we put such a high priority on a moral innovation is that missionary
        societies outcompete mercenary ones, not just in theory but in practice. For

223
222                      CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



         example, the historian Paul Johnson once pointed out that the for-profit colonies
         in America failed but the religious ones had the cohesion and commitment to
         make it through the brutal winters (see 11:00 here). We discuss this at length in
         the chapter on the One Commandment.

      A sense of national consciousness. Everyone in a network state feels like they’re
         part of the same community, sharing the same values and culture. They’re a
         nation in the sense of Renan. . . “to have done great things together, to want to do
         more.” Again, it’s much more like a complete graph than a typical social network,
         as almost every node is friendly with a very large fraction of other nodes.

      A recognized founder. A state, like a company, needs a leader. Especially early
         on. But truly strong leadership comes from consent and buy-in, not propaganda
         or force. Hence, it’s important to have a recognized founder, one that people
         actually listen to and choose to follow by joining the community.

         Can that founder break up the Triforce, splitting their authority into some kind
         of multisig? Sure, just like the founder of a startup company can choose to give
         up board seats. But it’s easy to give away power and hard to consolidate it,
         and you need that power sometimes to make hard but important non-consensus
         decisions.3 That’s why dual-class stock to maintain control is used by both the
         US establishment and their opponents.

         As with giving up corporate board seats, giving up some power may be the right
         thing to do at some point for the network state founder. But in the event that
         a network state degenerates into a bureaucracy - as many mature organizations
         do - a key part of the network state model is that it is, like the startup model,
         built to always allow peaceful exit. Anyone can, at any time, leave to found a
         new startup society and try scaling it into a network state.

      A capacity for collective action. This is tightly related to the concept of national
         consciousness. It’s a combination of collective purpose (which is like the mission
         statement of a company, but for a community) and the capacity to act on that
         purpose.

         First, let’s understand the idea of collective purpose through some examples. The
         Puritans wanted to build a “City on a Hill.” The Japanese after the Meiji Restora-
         tion replaced their previous mission statement of “Revere the Emperor, Expel the
         Barbarians” with “Enrich the Country, Strengthen the Military,” turning their
         society around 180 degrees and thereby building the first non-white industrialized
         power. And while the process of Indian Independence and Partition was messy
         beyond belief, on the other side the collective purpose of independence unified

    3Read Ben Horowitz on courage: “On the surface, it appears that if the decision is a close call, it’s
much safer to go with the crowd. In reality, if you fall into this trap, the crowd will influence your
thinking and make a 70/30 decision seem like a 51/49 decision. This is why courage is critical.” But
courage alone is not always enough - you need sufficient control to be able to execute that courageous
decision. That’s where founder control comes in.

224
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           223



         the Indian nation in a way it never had been before, with hundreds of so-called
         “princely states” and countless ethnic groups now integrated into a single India.4

         As one more example, JFK once focused the US on the common purpose of
         “achieving the goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Moon
         and returning him safely to the Earth.” This was a collective purpose different
         from but allied with the also-valid zero-sum goal of defeating communism. It was
         perhaps the penultimate great thing the US accomplished as a unified country,
         with the defeat of the Soviet Union as the last.

         These collective purposes helped unify their respective nations. They may be
         imperfect, but once there’s no collective purpose at all, people start wondering
         who they are. “Who are we?” That directionlessness leads to what we see in
         today’s US, split into two tribes whose only “collective purpose” is to win a zero-
         sum game against the other - a game each thinks it must win before being able
         to move forward to the promised land.

         Next, supposing we have a collective purpose, what does collective action towards
         that purpose look like? This is why the process of building a network state
         includes a network union. From the very outset it organizes people to work
         together for the benefit of their chosen community through the familiar interface
         of their screens. This, again, is quite different from current “social” networks
         like Twitter, which give individual scores for likes and followers but no team
         dashboard, no way of setting and achieving tangible goals as a group.

      An in-person level of civility. In the 90s and 2000s it was attention-getting when
         people were grossly incivil to each other online, as it was a funny contrast to the
         generally civil oine world. Now it’s just old, and not funny anymore. Moreover,
         internet ideologies have emerged that justify random nastiness with slogans like
         “civility is tone policing” or “toxicity is social defense.” Yet a society where ev-
         eryone is constantly disrespectful to everyone else doesn’t seem like a progressive,
         public-spirited society. And the conservative US of the 1950s managed to main-
         tain a strong level of self-defense because they were internally civil. So whether
         one is coming from the left or right, pulling together a high-trust society means
         in-person levels of civility towards community fellow members, both oine and
         online. High trust in turn comes from alignment towards a collective purpose and
         a sense of national consciousness.

      An integrated cryptocurrency. This is the digital backbone of the network state.
         It manages the internal digital assets, the smart contracts, the web3 citizen lo-
         gins, the birth and marriage certificates, the property registries, the public na-
         tional statistics, and essentially every other bureaucratic process that a nation
         state manages via pieces of paper. Because it’s protected by encryption, it can
         coordinate all the functions of a state across the borders of legacy nation states.

    4See this map and this one to get a sense of what India looked like prior to Independence. It’s
much like a map of Central Europe before Bismarck.

225
224                      CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



      An archipelago of crowdfunded physical territories. This is the physical footprint
         of the network state. Rather than buying territory in one place, or trying to
         negotiate sovereignty up front, you build the community in the cloud and then
         crowdfund physical real estate on the earth. That’s office space, yes, but also
         homes and shops - just spread all around the world in clusters, rather than con-
         centrated in one place. You network these clusters together using the internet
         into a network archipelago, eventually using newer technologies to make them
         more real. For example, you can make the flag of a network state appear to
         anyone with augmented reality glasses and the right NFT, as per this visual.
         You can also make doors open on command for community members, where their
         ENS name is their login. The point is that a network state is not a purely digi-
         tal thing. It has a substantial physical component: all the buildings around the
         world crowdfunded by its members.

      A consensual government limited by a social smart contract. Now we get to
         the government. Many people make the mistake of thinking the laws (or the
         land) come first when starting a new state, but laws should only come after the
         formation of an organic people – of a network nation – not before. That’s because
         laws encode the implicit understanding of a people. Contra the concept that you
         “can’t legislate morality”, that’s all you can do: set up laws that reflect the moral
         consensus of a people as to what is encouraged and discouraged, acceptable and
         optional, mandatory and forbidden.

         How is that moral consensus arrived at? It could be through a 51% democracy
         (where 51% of people can outvote the other 49%) or it could be via a 100%
         democracy (where 100% of people have migrated into a system and can migrate
         out at any time), or it could be via one of the zillions of techniques for satisfying
         preferences described in the literature.

         The specifics don’t matter as much as the ethics. That is, what makes a govern-
         ment legitimate is not process but substance.5 Given the consent of the governed,
         any form of government is internally legitimate. The question is then whether it
         will be considered externally legitimate, whether the world at large will accept
         this government - but that is an empirical question more than an ethical one.

         Put another way, if people can opt in to bungee jumping and skydiving, if eu-
         thanasia is legal, then experimenting with self-governmental systems that vary
         dramatically from the status quo should also be legal. Many of them won’t work,
         but many projects don’t work either; that doesn’t mean we stop people from
         trying.

         One way of thinking about this is that the typical Ford customer doesn’t care
         about how Ford’s internal affairs are managed. The buyer doesn’t care whether

    5There is a tendency to equate “elections” with legitimacy, but the Soviets held many elections,
and communist states tend to proclaim themselves the Democratic People’s Republic of So-and-So.
Didn’t make it so. What you really want is the consent of the governed, and some way to measure
that, such as on-chain evidence.

226
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           225



         Ford is organized by product or by function, whether they’re run top-down by the
         CEO or in a consultative way with the board, whether they pay market salaries
         or incentivize more heavily with stock. Ford could be a holocracy or a co-op.
         So long as everyone has consented to be governed by the Ford CEO by signing
         an employee agreement, and can leave if that agreement is no longer congenial,
         Ford’s internal arrangements are ethical.

         This logic works so long as you can opt out of Ford’s ecosystem completely.
         Have you driven a Ford, lately? It’s trickier when it’s something like Google,
         which is so powerful that it’s hard for the non-Chinese portion of the planet to
         fully opt out of. Then you might want some kind of say in what goes on inside
         the Googleplex. Still, most companies aren’t Google. Setting aside the edge
         case of “inescapable global ubiquity” for now, the ethical case for allowing opt-in
         experiments in corporate governance is pretty strong, for taking a broad view of
         the “consent of the governed.”

         Now extend that idea to non-corporate governance, with coin governance as a
         proof point, and network states as an endpoint. Questions arise. How could
         consent be given? How could others measure that consent was freely given?
         And what if someone wants to retract that consent, perhaps right before they’re
         subject to an act of governance they don’t like?

         In practice, we say that a user has consented to be governed by a startup society
         if he has signed a social smart contract that gives a system administrator limited
         privileges over that user’s digital life in return for admission to the startup society.
         This portmanteau term combines Rousseau’s concept of the “social contract” with
         the blockchain concept of the “smart contract.”

         Signing the social smart contract is very similar to depositing your funds with
         a centralized exchange, or locking them up in a smart contract with admin keys
         – you’re taking conscious risk with an on-chain asset in return for admission
         to a digital ecosystem. Now imagine using your ENS6 to “log in” to a startup
         society, thereby giving it limited privileges over your account in order to enter
         that startup society.

         What does that log in entail? The simplest version of this is using your ENS
         to log into a startup society community. A more sophisticated version is using
         your ENS to enter a part of the so-called “open metaverse” governed by a startup
         society. But the most interesting version is using your ENS to log into oine
         territory owned by a startup society, as in the aforementioned example where an
         ENS handshake opens a smart lock, or the one where it shows a glowing sigil.
         You might also have to put down a deposit to physically enter a startup society
         managed territory.

    6ENS stands for “Ethereum Name System”. You can check it out at ens.domains. There are other
crypto name systems as well, like SNS (the Solana Name System); ENS is just the adoption leader at
time of writing.

227
226                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        You can extrapolate that ENS-login-to-physical-world example dramatically. As
        more physical territories are crowdfunded by a startup society, and more smart
        devices within those territories are owned by the society, it can exert consensual
        digital governance within those territories on all who opted in by signing the
        social smart contract. For example, if someone misbehaves within a given startup-
        society-owned jurisdiction, after a Kleros-style digital trial, their deposits could
        be frozen and their ENS locked out of all doors for a time period as a punishment.

        This is at first blush similar to what’s already happening in both the West and
        China, where Canadian trucker funds are being frozen and WeChat QR codes are
        being used as instruments of digital control. . . but with one enormous difference,
        which is that if we can build many different startup societies to choose from,
        then there is much more practical consent of the governed, because there are
        many startup societies to choose from with explicit social smart contracts.

        Essentially, the key insight is that “government” is becoming synonymous with
        digital government. In any US-establishment- controlled territory your Google
        account will soon be frozen for crossing the US establishment. In any CCP-
        controlled territory your WeChat account can be frozen for crossing the CCP. But
        in any crypto-anarchic territory there may not be much in the way of functional
        digital services at all. So if one wants modernity constrained by cryptography, the
        concept of the “social smart contract” is one way to achieve consensual, limited
        government – to limit what a government can do by tightly limiting its access to
        your digital identity and resources, much like you can control exactly how much
        you deposit onto a centralized exchange.

        That sounds good at first. Then it sounds bad. Because if governance is limited
        solely to the digital realm, only to on-chain assets and smart locks, how does a
        startup society deal with physical criminals? The short answer is that for a long
        time, it doesn’t – it leaves that to the surrounding legacy society, much like a
        centralized crypto exchange collaborates with traditional oine law enforcement.
        Eventually, if and when that startup society becomes a network state – in the
        sense of achieving diplomatic recognition from a legacy sovereign – then it can
        potentially take on physical law enforcement duties.

        In the meantime, physical law enforcement itself is gradually turning into some-
        thing done with autonomous robots - whether they be legged robodogs, rolling
        cameras, or flying drones. So more law enforcement is being done from a com-
        mand line. And that trend gradually converges with the concept of digital law
        enforcement by a network state.

        To summarize: when we say that a network state has “consensual government
        limited by a social smart contract”, we mean that it exercises authority over
        a digital (and, eventually, physical) sphere constituted solely of those people
        who’ve opted in to its governance by signing a social smart contract with their
        ENS names, in much the same way they might “opt in” to the governance of a
        centralized exchange by depositing coins there.

228
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           227



      A virtual capital. A network state is physically distributed, but its people still
         digitally assemble in one place. That cloud assembly point could initially be
         something as modest as a Discord channel, but will eventually be a private sub-
         network of the open metaverse. That means a virtual reality (VR) environment
         with parts that can be seamlessly projected into the physical world with aug-
         mented reality (AR) glasses, so that you can see digital people, buildings, or
         objects in the real world, like this. Access to a network state’s virtual capital,
         like everything else in a network state, is gated by web3 login limited to citizens.

         The most ambitious version of this allows community members to gather online
         to create virtual architectural blueprints for new physical nodes of the network
         state, as per this tweet. The reason this is feasible is that architecture is moving
         to VR. You could imagine a much higher resolution version of Minecraft that
         gets materialized into the physical world by a crowdfunded contractor (or by
         community members with construction experience themselves). Think about the
         scene from Fight Club where the camera swivels around the room to show price
         tags on everything, and now imagine that in VR, with the cost to materialize
         each virtual structure in the physical world hovering above it.

      An on-chain census that proves a large enough population, income, and real estate
         footprint. A distributed society needs a distributed census. Unlike the US census,
         and more like Facebook’s census of its userbase, a startup society’s census can be
         conducted in real-time rather than every ten years. But a skeptical world won’t
         just take those numbers on faith, given a fledgling startup society’s incentive
         to overestimate them. They may trust the US government, or even Facebook
         (a public company) on its audited user numbers, but not some upstart startup
         society - not without some proof.

         But how do you prove that a given startup society really has 10,000 residents
         and one billion dollars in annual income and 10M square meters in its real es-
         tate footprint? Each of these elements can be established via on-chain data. We
         already have techniques for proof-of-human, proof-of-income (via on-chain ac-
         counting) and proof-of-real-estate (via blockchain real estate). We can get into
         technical detail on how you solve the “crypto oracle problem” of getting off-chain
         data reliably onto the blockchain, but the short version is that you can use a sta-
         tistical estimator to take into account the fact that individual oracles may have
         errors. By accumulating the censuses of all startup societies in a hypothetical
         nationrealestatepop.com site similar to coinmarketcap.com, you could track
         in realtime the number of startup society members, the acreage of real estate
         owned by those members, and their on-chain GDP.7

      Attain a measure of diplomatic recognition. Now we come to the main event:

    7The same techniques a network state uses to prove its own numbers on chain can be used to create
so-called “shadow statistics” that replace the official statistics of legacy governments. For example,
if you don’t believe the US government numbers for inflation, you’d do something like the post at
thenetworkstate.com/inflation to generate an alternative on-chain dashboard for inflation.

229
228                      CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



         diplomatic recognition. Diplomatic recognition by a pre-existing government is
         what distinguishes a network state from a startup society, just as “diplomatic
         recognition” by an exchange like the NASDAQ distinguishes a public company
         from a startup.

         Diplomatic recognition requires a putative state to have clout, and clout is in
         turn established by a publicly verifiable on-chain census of population, income,
         and real estate, to prove that your growing society is as large as you say it is.
         That’s why the aforementioned census is important.

Putting all that together, we can see that the definition of a network state culminates
in attaining diplomatic recognition from a pre-existing government, which requires far
more substance, leadership, physical presence, and long-term commitment than a typ-
ical online community, or even a cryptocurrency. It may be a LARP, but it’s not done
on a lark.


Breaking the Definition

You can start to see why we have several parts to the definition. If you subtract one
part you get something that doesn’t quite match our intuition of what the next version
of the nation state should be. Let’s do that, subtracting each part just to see how it
breaks.

      No social network. If there’s no social network, you have no digital profiles,
         no messaging, no community fora, no mass media, and no easy way to recruit
         from the internet. You’d essentially be living an Amish life, relying on pieces of
         paper or oine cues to determine who was part of your new state and how they
         interacted. This isn’t going to succeed the nation state.

      No recognized founder. With no recognized leader, you have no way of making
         contentious decisions or setting the agenda.8 A founder is the best kind of leader,
         because they have the legitimacy associated with building an organization from
         scratch. Unlike a dictator, their authority isn’t forced upon the population, and
         anyone can exit at any time. And unlike a media oligarchy, a founder’s authority
         doesn’t arise from propagandistic bombardment but from free choice.

      No sense of national consciousness. If there is no sense of national consciousness,
         there is no nation underpinning the network state. It’s just a bunch of random
         people with nothing in common.

      No capacity for collective action. A group of people that lacks a capacity for
         collective action - like most online communities, frankly - isn’t going to get any-
         where.9 Even if they have national consciousness, without the capacity to orga-

    8This seems obviously bad, but because it’s easier to split up power than to consolidate it, you
see this failure mode all the time - in San Francisco’s vetocracy, in the Polish Parliament, in public
companies with too many board members, in bureaucratic DAOs, and in co-ops.
    9This is also why ultra-libertarian startup societies tend to fail. They’re right about the desirability
of founding new societies, but wrong in their estimate of how much cooperation and self-sacrifice is

230
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           229



         nize (which arises in part from a leader), they certainly can’t build a state.

      No in-person level of civility. A group of people that constantly tears each other
         down won’t build an outhouse together, let alone a state. More deeply, the folks
         who throw around slogans like “civility is tone policing” or “kill your heroes” are
         actually engaged in endless status competition, because they have rejected the
         current hierarchy but not yet accepted a new one. In a functioning, legitimate
         hierarchy (see diagram here) there’s a mechanism for dispute resolution that
         doesn’t involve summoning a mob for every slight.

      No integrated cryptocurrency. After the financial deplatforming of Western proles
         and foreign elites, of Canadian truckers and 145M Russians, it’s clear that digital
         finance is a weapon of war. So without a sovereign digital currency (and, more
         generally, a sovereign system of record) there is no sovereignty.10

      No archipelago of crowdfunded physical territories. You can do many things
         online, but not everything. Without physical territory you can’t build FDA-
         free zones, or NRC-free areas, or the Keto Kosher community, or many kinds
         of substantive parallel societies. You also can’t meet, mate, mingle, and do all
         the other things humans do in person. And most importantly you’re not going
         to be taken seriously as a successor to the nation state without a large physical
         footprint. The approach of knitting together crowdfunded physical territory into
         a network archipelago addresses these issues.

      No virtual capital. Network states are not city states. City states were defeated
         by nation states for a reason: they are physically centralized and have limited
         scale. So particularist city states populated by small ethnic groups get rolled up
         by universalist nation states (or empires) with many ethnic groups.11

needed to build said societies. Basically, the libertarian is correctly calibrated on how foolish it is to
contribute to “social cooperation” in a declining-trust society like today’s US, where the establishment
is essentially scamming its subjects out of their life savings (via inflation) and their lives (via invasions).
But the libertarian often overcorrects, not realizing that while low trust is the optimal strategy for a
failing state, high trust will be needed to build a desirable high-trust society. In other words, you just
need a different mindset for living in a failing state than when building a startup society.
   10Note that this is complementary to Bitcoin. Just as any investor can choose to either hold shares
in a corporation or liquidate them for dollars, they can now choose to hold dollars or liquidate them
for Bitcoin. So too can they choose to hold a network state’s integrated cryptocurrency, or liquidate
it for Bitcoin if they don’t believe that network state will grow faster than BTC.
   For example, they might think the global Bitcoin economy will grow at only 5% per year start-
ing in 2035, but that this network state will grow in annual income at 50% per year. Growth is of
course not the only reason to buy and hold a network state’s cryptocurrency - there’s also a consump-
tion/patriotism reason. For example, you want to see that network state succeed, because you want
to see a post-FDA world or Keto Kosher society emerge.
   Issuing a new digital fiat currency for a new state does not mean we’re just coming “full circle.” It’s
the helical theory of history, where it’s a cycle on some dimensions and an advance on others. Think
of it as a version 3.0 of the financial system: from the v1 of bad fiat dollars to the v2 of Bitcoin-only
to the v3 of new opt-in fiat currencies checked by the power of Bitcoin.
   11San Marino is the exception that proves the rule, the only surviving city state that didn’t get
rolled up into a 20th century universalist empire.

231
230                      CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



         That’s the reason a network state has a virtual capital rather than a physical one.
         Think of it as “remote-first,” but for a society. In a remote company, nothing
         officially exists unless it’s online, in an internal system of record like GitHub.
         Similarly, in a remote society, nothing officially exists unless it’s on-chain, in the
         blockchain system of record for that society.

         Put another way: if you don’t consciously set the capital of your network state
         to be virtual, it’ll be physical. And if it’s physical, the capital is centralized in
         one place, and can get invaded by a nation state. But if it’s instead a virtual
         capital, with a backend that is encrypted and on-chain, then - in the fullness of
         time - you can host an entire subset of the metaverse there, assuming blockspace
         increases as bandwidth did.

      No on-chain census that proves a large enough population, income, and real estate
         footprint. The US Census is in the US Constitution for a reason; you need to
         know something about your people to run a government. But for a network state,
         the challenges are different than those that faced the Founding Fathers.

         The hard part isn’t how to collect the data; with modern technology it can be
         slurped up and dashboarded in real-time, rather than collected every ten years
         on millions of pieces of paper. No, the hard part is getting people to believe the
         data, given the huge incentives for faking the numbers.12

         That means establishing a cryptographically auditable information supply chain,
         a transparent way of gathering the numbers for the network state census. That
         means showing the work so that people don’t need to trust you, and can run the
         computation themselves.13

         Why is this important? Think again about the emergence of Bitcoin. Price was a
         signal, a signal of strength. Millions of trades across dozens of exchanges produced
         a signal that was reliable enough for companies and eventually governments to
         act upon. Price is why Bloomberg listed Bitcoin on a ticker in 2013. And price
         is why El Salvador recognized Bitcoin as a sovereign currency in 2021. We’re not
         talking about the short-term price here, which is and will be highly volatile, but
         the long-term price - the secular trend.

         Similarly, if people can check for themselves that there’s a startup society that
         has built itself into an network archipelago with 10M square meters of land, over

   12Think about how much people want to be in the top 30 coins on Coinmarketcap, or at the top
of the Substack leaderboard, or among the list of unicorns. I agree with Thiel that often the goal
is to escape competition. But competition can also sometimes be good, as it incentivizes people to
work harder to win. And the competition to build startup societies into network states with large
populations, incomes, and real estate footprints can be good. . . so long as we set it up from the start
with an eye towards cryptographic auditability.
   13Paradoxically, the organization that demands trust can get less of it, while the organization that
shows their work - thereby not asking for trust - builds up more of it. This is rational: if an outsider
can independently confirm every claim that can reasonably be checked, they have more reason to give
the organization benefit of the doubt on claims that cannot be so checked.

232
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           231



         10 billion dollars in annual income, and 100k people, then that starts to become
         a society worthy of diplomatic recognition.

      No measure of diplomatic recognition. Many libertarians don’t get the concept
         of diplomatic recognition, just like many progressives don’t get the desirability of
         starting new countries, so this point is worth discussing.

         What happens if you don’t have diplomatic recognition? Then you aren’t in the
         club of legitimate states. That means any government can invade you at will,
         and the others will just shrug. It also means you don’t have access to things like
         sovereign debt markets. You can’t ink trade or passport deals. You likely can’t
         buy many goods and services that corporations or states sell only to other states,
         because you’re not considered a legitimate government by the rest of the market.
         You certainly can’t write new regulations for your jurisdiction, because others do
         not recognize your lawful authority over that jurisdiction, and can (again) invade
         you at will.

         Basically, without diplomatic recognition, you aren’t considered real. That’s why
         micronations don’t work. They have no organic community, so they have no
         answer to the question of “you and what army?” And even more importantly, no
         answer to the question of “you and what legitimacy?”

         You can think of diplomatic recognition by a pre-existing state as a “non-binding
         commitment to not invade.” Subsequent to recognition, the startup society now
         gains the ability to write laws governing the physical world in their patch of
         territory without being invaded - at least by the recognizing state.14 This is why
         we require diplomatic recognition in the definition of a network state.

This gives you a sense of why each of the parts of the definition exist. A network state
is at least as complex as a nation state, but the difference is that the latter already
exists, so we take for granted how it works.

What’s next? Once the first diplomatic recognition comes, and the first true network
state arises, more will follow. That means we need to start thinking about the network
state system.


   14There are many intermediate forms here. We’ll call out two. First, the pre-existing government
that first recognizes the network state - the “bootstrap recognizer” - may not be a UN member. It
could instead be a city or province. Think about how Wyoming passed a DAO law and Miami’s mayor
took a salary in Bitcoin, well before the US government as a whole formally embraced cryptocurrency.
Even a positive press release by a city about a fledgling startup society gets it on base, moving them
incrementally to the ultimate goal of recognition by sovereign states and eventually membership in
the UN (or whatever succeeds it).
   Second, diplomatic recognition is a negotiation, not a blank check. A sovereign state that recognizes
another may revoke that recognition if the second one starts legalizing heroin or becomes a base for
terrorism. Or it may just act like it’s revoking recognition, without formally doing so.

233
232                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



5.3.2 What is the Network State System?

The next step is to outline the assumptions of the network state system as a whole.
Read this and compare it to those of the nation state system.

      Digital first. The digital network of the internet is primary.

      Composition. A network state is composed of a national network (the equivalent
        of the nation) and a governance network (the analog of the state). Unlike a
        typical social network, a national network self-identifies as a nation. Unlike a
        typical social network company, a governance network is set up by that national
        network as the legitimate government of that digital people.

      Terra incognita returns. The network state system assumes many pieces of the
        internet will become invisible to other subnetworks. In particular, small network
        states may adopt invisibility as a strategy; you can’t hit what you can’t see.

      Terra nullius returns. The network state system further assumes that unclaimed
        digital territory always exists in the form of new domain names, crypto usernames,
        plots of land in the metaverse, social media handles, and accounts on new services.

      Bottom-up migration of people. The network state system embraces the fuzzy
        division of the internet into different sovereign subnetworks. It is a probabilistic
        digital division of people rather than a deterministic physical division
        of land. People migrate digitally and physically between network states; the
        citizenry is as dynamic as the land of a nation state is static.

      N networks per citizen. Unlike the nation state system, where most people have
        citizenship in only one state, in the network state system, every person can in
        principle be a member of more than one state, just as they can hold passports
        in more than one country, or be holders of more than one cryptocurrency, or be
        users of more than one social network. Of course, they can spend most of their
        time in one network state.

      Legitimacy from physical migration and digital choice. The power of network
        states is constrained by consent and cryptography. First, recall that the gover-
        nance network of a given network state is the analog to the state of a traditional
        country. This governance network only has control over those digital citizens (ne-
        tizens) that have opted in, individually or collectively, to its governance, much as
        one explicitly signs an employment contract when joining a company or implicitly
        signs a social contract when stepping across a border. A given national network
        can choose a governance network as an administrator, thereby forming (or join-
        ing) a network state with an on-chain record of their collective decision. Or an
        individual can join a network state on their own. Cryptography ensures that
        this choice is demonstrably free and uncoerced, because no state can easily seize
        an individual’s private keys. Cryptography further guarantees basic rights like
        freedom of speech, free migration, private property, freedom of digital assembly
        and the like, so long as each user has exclusive access to their private keys.

234
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               233


      Decentralized administration. The group of people that administers a network
        state, which we call a governance network, is composed of a founder/chief execu-
        tive and their engineers. They write laws in code to specify what is mandatory,
        encouraged, discouraged, and forbidden. These laws are interpreted by impar-
        tial servers and enforced by cryptography. In the network state system, each
        social subnetwork can choose which governance network administers them, as
        determined both by their physical location and where their digital property lies.
        Over time, this means polycentric law: people in a given physical area can switch
        between network states (and thus governance providers) just as they switch be-
        tween Uber and Lyft as taxi regulators, or Bitcoin and Ethereum as monetary
        regulators.

      Domestic monopoly of root access. The governance network of a network state has
        root access to an administrative interface where law enforcement can flip digital
        switches as necessary to maintain or restore domestic order, just like the sysad-
        mins of today’s tech companies. Of course, postulating the existence of such an
        interface presupposes a world where everything from money to messaging, doors
        to dwellings, farms to factories, flying drones to walking droids can be controlled
        from a single computer — but that world isn’t far off, and today there are few
        checks on the digital power of the tech companies that are bringing it into being.
        The network state system checks this power in two ways: by maintaining pri-
        vate keys (so foreign states and corporations cannot interfere in domestic affairs)
        and by enabling exit (so citizens can execute financial and electoral votes of no
        confidence if need be, both as individuals and as groups).

      International sovereignty via cryptography. For a network state, sovereignty is
        private keys. If access to the aforementioned administrative interface is con-
        trolled by private keys rather than a username/password combination, then the
        same encryption techniques that make it difficult for an outsider to seize an indi-
        vidual’s private keys can make it difficult for a foreign rival to steal a legitimate
        government’s private keys. This is a completely new way of defending sovereignty,
        a complement and/or replacement for the military.

      Digital diplomatic recognition. Network states can recognize each other bilaterally
        (similar to an API integration) or multilaterally (e.g., by supporting the same
        blockchains). When people exit to other network states, whether digitally or
        physically, they bring their most valuable possessions with them in the form of
        private keys. Some of these keys give access to property in global blockchains,
        others give access to physical goods like cars and houses, and still others give
        access to records hosted on state-run chains, like their netizen profile in the
        network state they just left. Diplomatic recognition is then about interoperability
        and compatibility: are the file formats and on-chain records used by one network
        state honored by another?

      Chains manage cooperation and constraint. Public blockchains are the equivalent
        of international law in a network state system. They facilitate economic and

235
234                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        social cooperation between network states and their netizens, but also constrain
        those states with cryptographically binding code.

      Pax Bitcoinica. The ultimate guarantor of exit, and of the network state system
        at large, is Bitcoin. As cryptocurrency rises in strength, Bitcoin or something like
        it becomes a government of governments. It sits above every state and constrains
        it from printing infinite quantities of money, from lawlessly seizing the funds of its
        citizens, and from waging forever war. In doing so, it limits that which will never
        limit itself. And even if the Bitcoin protocol specifically fails, or its cryptography
        has a bug, the concept of cryptocurrency and the choice it represents will not
        disappear from this earth.


Assumption: Digital Primary, Physical Secondary

One point we touched on above, but that bears repeating, is that the network state
system assumes the world has flipped to digital first: all nontrivial human-created
events start in the cloud and then, if important, are “printed out” into the physical
world.

Think about anything a human does today: all office work is online, as is much social-
ization. Courts are now online, as are politicians. So is money. So is agriculture, and
manufacturing, and shipping. The phone has indeed become the remote control for
the world. Many previously oine devices — cars, doors, desks, weights, coffeemakers,
even toothbrushes — are coming online. Even pacemakers leave a digital trace.

The physical still exists, of course. There are still physical human beings, there are
still physical plots of land, there are still physical rivers and mountains. And for some
law enforcement and military functions a network state will need physical robots.

But in a network state, everything physical is downstream of lines of code and enforced
by cryptography, just as in a nation state, everything physical is downstream of pieces
of paper and enforced by the police and military.


Assumption: The State Becomes An Admin Dashboard

A second assumption is that once every interface is digital, it can be put online. And
once online, in the absence of private keys, it can be centrally controlled.

So, the network state system assumes that states like the USA and PRC will continue
centralizing the power of their tech companies into one all-seeing dashboard, capable
of surveilling, deplatforming, freezing, and sanctioning millions at once, or anyone at
will. This digital power is currently exercised transnationally and without the consent
of the governed. They have no true free choice of administrator.

The network state system assumes that we can’t fully put this genie back in the bottle,
but we can constrain it. Specifically, we grant that every legitimate state will need
such power to govern its subnetwork, for the same reason any centralized service needs
a system administrator with root access. But we also build decentralized services that

236
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               235


do not have any single system administrator, and tools for the physical and digital exit
of citizens.


Assumption: Divide Networks Rather than Land

Just as in the pre-Westphalian period, where the Catholic Church exerted transnational
control, the digital power wielded by the American and Chinese empires invalidates
traditional notions of sovereignty. The Peace of Westphalia equivalent is a network
state system that limits the digital power of states solely to those who have opted in.
Just as post-Westphalian nation states were limited in control to people within their
territory, post-Satoshian network states will be limited in control to people who’ve
opted into their network. It is a division of the world by network rather than by land.


Assumption: Consent and Cryptography Constrain

So, in short, in the world of the network state, both states and citizens alike are powered
up. Network states have a root dashboard with full access to every digital aspect of the
network they govern. They also have security from outside interference because access
to these dashboards is gated via private keys rather than passwords.

However, this immense digital power is typically deployed nonviolently (unlike with
existing states) and constrained by cryptographic and physical exit, rather than by
paper laws or toothless treaties. This is what powers up citizens, who freely choose
whether to enter or exit, either collectively or individually.

Thus, the legitimacy of a network state comes not from top-down declamations, but
from bottom-up consent, as each netizen has opted in. A truly oppressive or incompe-
tent network state loses them to exit, or doesn’t gain citizens in the first place. And
no state is strong enough to block the ultimate exit that cryptocurrency represents.


5.3.3 The Network State as a Term

We can unpack the term “network state” in several useful and complementary ways.

    1. The network is the nation. The organic, voluntary, bottom-up nation that un-
        derpins the state is formed online in a network. This could be on the basis of
        language, culture, proposition, or some combination thereof. This represents a
        digital remedy to the phenomenon Putnam identified in Bowling Alone. In the
        year 2000, we were bowling alone but by 2020 we were posting together. COVID-
        19 accelerated this process —people were spread apart in the physical world but
        packed together online.

    2. The network is the territory. VR isn’t yet fully mature, but when it is, we’ll
        identify the territory of a network state as a subnetwork of the open metaverse.
        We can understand this if we think about domain names, social profiles, and ENS
        names — digital land can be created for free, but access to that land can become
        very valuable (and, when deplatforming is in the cards, very contentious). The

237
236                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        analogy to land goes very deep — to fully understand it, you need to understand
        graph layouts, but in short you can make maps of networks given any graph
        adjacency matrix. And if you use the distance metric of “number of degrees of
        separation in a social network,” that looks quite different from the map you get
        from a geographical distance matrix.

    3. The network is the state. How does a network state create and enforce laws?
        Digitally. It’s Locke’s justification of the state as the protector of private property,
        in the form of a digital registry. And it’s Lessig’s code-is-law, but on-chain. Our
        entire antiquated process of adversarially writing high-stakes laws on paper at
        the last minute, deploying them in production to hundreds of millions of people
        without any testing, and then getting them interpreted in unpredictable ways by
        regulators and solicitors will be seen as a bizarre relic of an older time. Paper
        laws will go the way of powdered wigs.

    4. The Network is the Leviathan. Here, we capitalize Network as it’s being used
        in the sense of God, State, Network. The Network here is a candidate for the
        most powerful force in the world, where the Leviathan in the Hobbesian sense
        is not divinity (God) or military (the State) but community and cryptography
        (Network). From this viewpoint, the Network State can be seen as a fusion of
        Leviathans, like the God/State combination of the mid-century USA, where the
        Marines fought for “God and Country” and where Americans pledged allegiance
        to the flag “under God.”

So: in a network state, the network is the lives (national network), the land (metaverse
subnet), the law (governance network), and the Leviathan (Bitcoin network) all packed
into one. It’s the people, the digital territory they occupy, the rules that bind them,
and the power that enforces those laws.


5.3.4 Micronetworks and Multinetworks

We noted earlier that a micronation is really a microstate, and many “nation states”
are actually multinational empires. These concepts generalize to networks.

We can think of a micronetwork as a startup that intends to build a social network,
but has zero users. So a micronetwork is like a micronation that plants a flag, but
has zero citizens. Similarly, a multinetwork like Facebook is a billion-person-scale
social network with many subnetworks under one company. . . just like the multinational
Roman Empire, where many different groups were ruled by one state. Perhaps there’s
a reason Zuck admires Augustus.

But the analogy breaks down in an important way.


Startups create Networks, but Nations create States

In a “micronetwork,” aka a startup, the startup creates the network that it ends up
managing, both in the sense of the people in that network and the digital domain itself.

238
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               237


Zuck came first, then registered thefacebook.com; only then came the users. But in a
real nation, the people and their physical domain precede the state. For example, the
Japanese people and islands predate the current Japanese government.

That’s one way people went wrong with micronations. You can’t just treat them like
a normal startup where you start with one person and build an impersonal product!
The prospective network state founder needs to think about “nation building” from day
one. That’s not just community building on steroids — ideally, that nation building
process is really nation discovery. In other words, there’s an existing community out
there with an unexpressed national identity at the top of their identity stack, and they
want to crowdfund territory and build their decentralized Zion. The network state is
then just a catalyst for this.


Startups create Networks, but Startups aren’t States

Of course, people have also gone wrong with the startup-to-state analogy in a different
way: by thinking startups could act just like states without a legitimating process.

Suppose we try the analogy that “state is to a startup as nation is to network.” That
is, just as a state manages a nation and sets its laws, a startup like early Facebook or
Twitter manages a social network and sets its policy.

This worked, until it didn’t. Facebook and Twitter have succeeded beyond anyone’s
expectations, yet they weren’t set up to be governments. People didn’t consciously
sign a social contract to be governed by them. Facebook and Twitter grew to take over
much of people’s lives, but have no concept of digital property rights. Seizures and
silencing weren’t part of the bargain.


Startups create Centralized Networks, but Chains create Decentralized Net-
works

There are at least two ways to add genuine choice, and hence legitimacy, to centralized
networks.

    1. Free the backend. On a free spot of land, you can have a nation without a
        governing state. Similarly, if we had a free region of the cloud, we could have
        a network without a governing startup. That’s what Satoshi did: he reopened
        the frontier, gave us a cloud without corporations. He showed us how to create
        digital networks without any single centralized authority. One extension of that
        gives us decentralized social networks, the basis for an open metaverse. So that’s
        one way to solve the problem: build digital land that isn’t controlled by any
        single startup. Anyone on that land could then freely choose between governance
        networks.

    2. Free the login. The other, related way out is to retrofit an existing centralized
        social network to enable web3 login, such that users can contact each other outside
        the service and their usernames are not locked into the system. Note that this

239
238                      CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



         is far more substantive than merely allowing users to “export their data” — it’s
         more like the capability to message your followers without Facebook or Twitter’s
         permission.


Only Decentralized Networks can give rise to Network States

Without one or ideally both of these features (decentralized backend and decentralized
login), a micronetwork might grow into a multinetwork, just like 0-person Facebook
became 3 billion-person Facebook. . . but it wouldn’t have the legitimation of exit that
enables a true network state. The millions of people on current platforms (and future
ones) must be given the option to leave15 with all their digital valuables in order for
their stay to be considered uncoerced.



5.3.5 0-network, 1-network, N-networks

We know that multinational empires tend to have the same failure modes as microna-
tions: the state doesn’t actually represent a single distinct people, and thus fails on
that basis.

Towards that end, it’s worth taking the overloaded term of “social networks” and disag-
gregating it into 0-networks, 1, networks, and N-networks, just as we did for microna-
tions, nation states, and multinational empires.

Here’s a concrete example:

      0-network: Facebook at inception, 1 person founder, no users

      1-network: Facebook at Harvard, one month after founding

      N-network: Facebook today, 3+ billion users

And here’s the underlying definitions that inform that example:

      0-network: an aspirational social network startup with no users

      1-network: a coherent community

      N-network: a massive global network of networks

In more detail:

A 0-network is a startup with aspirations for creating a large social network, messaging
app, two-sided marketplace, crypto exchange, or other digital watering hole where

   15Think about the difference between the employees of Facebook Inc, vs the users of Facebook. The
former can leave with their salaries and vested equity, and as such are OK with Zuck having total
control as CEO. The latter are locked in, and cannot leave, and did not realize how valuable their
digital property was to them.

240
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           239



people interact. Note that not every online service fits this definition; some apps like
Mathematica or Photoshop are pure utilities.16

An N-network is the equivalent of a multinational empire. It’s not a good base for a
network state, for the simple reason that it doesn’t represent a single nation, a set of
coherent people. For example, the 300M users of Twitter or the 3B+ users of Facebook
are unified by nothing more than a desire for likes. Of course, some of the subnetworks
of an N-network may have enough asabiyyah to form a network state.

A 1-network is the basis for a network state, something like a focused subreddit, a
moderated Facebook group, a PHP BB forum, a large Telegram channel, or the follow-
ing of a single Twitter influencer. Of course, not all subreddits would be 1-networks,
but r/keto with its intense dietary culture is much closer than a global forum like
r/worldnews. A 1-network typically has some basic form of moderation (a moderator
can ban you, an influencer can block you), some community norms, and mechanisms
for enforcement. It doesn’t have all the criteria of a nation — the shared language,
customs, history, and culture — but it’s like a proto-nation.

The following of a single large YouTube or Twitter influencer is probably the best kind
of 1-network out there, in the sense of a proto-nation for a network state, because it
has shared context and history, as well as pointers towards a leader who can act as a
dispute resolver.


5.3.6 What is a (National) Network?

We now have a few definitions in hand:

      the properties of a nation

      the idea of a network state as a combination of a national network (the people)
         and a governance network (the state)

      and the just-introduced concept of a 1-network as a proto-nation, an embryonic
         version of the national network that underpins a network state

We also earlier noted that the definition of a nation was a bit fuzzy, both in the
dictionary sense and according to different thinkers. With those preliminaries, we can
now give a computational answer to the question of “what is a nation?”


A Verbal Description

You can redefine a traditional nation as a densely connected subgraph in a social net-
work. Based on some metric — such as linguistic distance, genomic distance, ideological
distance, or cryptocurrency holdings — the nodes of a bona fide nation should group
more tightly with each other than they do with other networks.

   16Though as soon as you name something like that, you start asking whether it might be useful to
build a social network around that tool, just like we have communities of plumbers and electricians.

241
240                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


In mathematical terms, nations are highly connected subgraphs of a global network
according to one or more network distance metrics, like

      geographic distance: great circle distance on surface of earth

      network distance: degrees of separation in a social network

      genetic distance: eg, Fst (fixation index) or another measure

      linguistic distance: eg, lexicostatistical measures

      economic distance: eg, 1—cosine similarity

      ideological distance: degree of similarity in belief as expressed by spatial theory
        of voting

The advantage of this definition is that while it’s still fuzzy (how connected exactly
does the subgraph have to be?), it’s now amenable to quantitative analysis. Given a
network, a set of distance metrics, and some parameter choices, the subgraphs pop out.
By this definition, a real nation would have more ingroup than outgroup connections,
more “domestic” than “international” calls.


A Computational Approach

Here’s how you’d actually do that computation.

      Begin with any large N-network like Twitter with K = 300M users and N postu-
        lated subnetworks. Calculate any or all of the following distance metrics between
        individuals, if you have available data, using the definitions from the preceding
        section.

            – dp (geographic distance)

            – dn (network distance)

            – dg (genetic distance)

            – dl (linguistic distance)

            – de (economic distance)

            – di (ideological distance)

      Suppose we have six such metrics. Calculate them on K people, to form a K 
        K 6 tensor of distances.

      Also collect a training set of labeled edges, where two people are marked as being
        part of the same 1-network or not, designated by Y = 1. For example, you might
        put two English-speaking Bitcoin holders who own guns, subscribe to r/keto,
        and follow each other on Twitter in the same 1-network.

      Now use any machine learning technique to estimate P(Y = 1jd1::6). Something
        like Naive Bayes can work, or something more sophisticated.

242
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               241


      Finally, set a threshold of say P(Y = 1jd1::6) > 0:50. All the densely connected
        subgraphs that pop out of that process are the 1-networks.

In other words, given a set of postulated measures of national similarity, a bit of training
data, and a parameter choice, we can cluster a large network into subgraphs. Applied
to continental scale social networks like Facebook and Twitter, we’d be able to see
different kinds of clusters pop out for different parameter choices, much like you do
with the lasso.

Assuming you could get access to a global dataset like Facebook or Twitter’s network
(or scrape it), you could turn all philosophical disputes about what a nation is into
simply a set of parameter choices. That means a nation is a subnetwork in a global
social graph.


5.3.7 What does a Network State look like on a Map?

The first thing is to specify which map we mean: a map of the physical world, or of
the digital world?


The Physical Map

In physical space, a network state looks like an archipelago of interconnected enclaves.
As the dashboard above shows, netizens crowdfund territory around the world, link
those pieces together digitally, and then use technologies like web3 logins and mixed
reality to seamlessly link the online and oine.

Each such node of the network state represents a group of digital citizens who have
chosen to live together in the physical world. As shown in the dashboard, the network
state’s population, income, and real estate is summed over all netizens across all net-
work nodes. As the state grows, these numbers can, over time, become comparable to
the footprint of legacy nation states, including the real estate footprint.

So, a network state is a physically distributed state, a bit like Indonesia, but with its
pieces of land separated by internet rather than ocean.


The Digital Map

In digital space, a network state looks like a densely connected subgraph of a large
social network. In our terminology, it’s a 1-network, not an N-network. To gain some
intuition for digital space, realize that it is very different from physical space:

      Dimensionality. You don’t have just the two dimensions of latitude and longitude,
        in a complex social network, you might need N dimensions to properly represent
        the graph structure.

      Plasticity. Imagine one day, South Africa suddenly appeared near NYC, with
        a footbridge to connect the two. That’s like Spotify doing a deal with Uber;
        suddenly, two huge networks get bridged and people can start walking across.

243
242                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        This will become much more obvious as metaverse subnetworks are connected
        and disconnected by management on the basis of diplomatic relations between
        network states.

      Speed. Take a look at the full global footprint of the British Empire at its zenith,
        and now realize that Facebook achieved greater global penetration than that in
        just a few years.

      Elasticity. It’s hard to create more land (Dubai has done some work in the area,
        and cruise ships arguably count), but it’s easy to create more digital land —
        albeit hard to make it valuable. The value of land is based on location, location,
        location, but for digital real estate it’s connection, connection, connection.

      Invisibility. We take for granted that we can see the Franco/German border, that
        we know who is on either side. But no one can really see the Facebook/Twitter
        border, the set of users that have accounts on both services but use them both for
        roughly 50% of their time online. Borders between nation states are by default
        highly visible, borders between networks are by default invisible.

This last point is truly deep: we’re going back to terra incognita, to terra nullius, to
the time of secret societies, to the time of “Here Be Dragons.” The open web is already
dark to all but Google, the social web is already dark to all but Facebook and Twitter
et al., and while the third web will have some parts that are globally transparent, much
of it will be intentionally private and encrypted.

This is not a bad thing; in many ways, what we did over the last few decades was
upload the entire world in unencrypted form online. Never before has it been possible
for so many to stalk anyone. The re-encryption of the world has started with a tactical
retreat from public social networks towards Signal groups, but it will go much further.

We may have hit peak map. Cartography becomes harder in a digital space that’s
darker and more dynamic than the well-lit physical world. Continents, once discovered,
don’t tend to move on you, but the internet brings us back to the time of Pangaea —
millions of nodes can disconnect and reconnect elsewhere all at once should they see
fit, and new supercontinents of 100M+ connected users like TikTok can just arise out
of nowhere.

In short, our intuitions for digital space are just completely different from physical
space. We’ll return to this topic, but recognize that it really is a fundamental difference:
while the nation state is based on a deterministic physical division of land into states,
the network state is based on probabilistic digital division of people into subnetworks.


Example: Physically Proximal, Digitally Divergent

Take a look at this tweet. It shows that in physical space, the red and blue areas of the
United States are cheek-by-jowl, but in digital space they are wholly disjoint. Thus,
the US is not really a “nation” state. It’s at least a binational state, what we’d call a

244
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           243



2-network, with two strongly connected subgraphs at each other’s throats. These two
nations are packed into the same physical environment, but are far apart mentally.

A network state makes the opposite tradeoff. It’s a group of people spread out in
physical space, but highly aligned in digital space. It’s a 1-network, not an N-network.


5.3.8 How is a Network State Founded?

We just talked about the need for a 1-network to be the basis of a network state,
unlike an N-network. A 1-network is a focused, moderated community like Ethereum
Research, while an N-network is something like Facebook in the early 2020s, with N
communities under its multibillion-person banner (where N is very large).

But there’s another constraint for network state creation beside the 1-network, and
that’s the constraint of reality. Saying “I’m founding a network state” is a little like
saying “I’m founding a billion-dollar public company.” It’s not an impossible goal17,
but it’s difficult, and we want to avoid terminological dilution and encourage realistic
ambition.

If we think about the startup community, we have a few definitions that allow us to
talk about stages. We have startup companies and tech companies. We have seed, VC,
and growth investors. We have bootstrapped companies and we have venture-backed
companies. We have early stage vehicles, billion-dollar unicorns, and trillion-dollar tech
giants.

Along the same lines, let’s introduce a few definitions that help us establish the path
to the network state.

As umbrella terms, we’ll use the concepts of startup societies and parallel societies,
which are roughly analogous to startups and tech companies respectively. Like a startup
(and unlike a small business), a startup society is a small group with ambitions of doing
big things. Like a tech company (and unlike a legacy entity), a parallel society is a
small-to-large group of people with at least one proposed major innovation relative to
how things were done before.

As sequential terms, we’ll talk about network unions, network archipelagos, and net-
work states. These are roughly analogous to seed, Series B, and public companies
respectively in terms of how much effort it takes to build them. A network union is
fully digital but is a real organization with money and a purpose, like a seed startup
that no longer merely exists on paper but has daily todos and folks doing things. A
network archipelago has built up enough money to crowdfund physical territory, like
a Series B company that has earned enough money to be taken more seriously. And a
network state has achieved diplomatic recognition from at least one legacy state, like a
public company that has jumped through all the necessary hoops to be recognized by
the NASDAQ.

   17Indeed, the purpose of this book is to show that network states are feasible and desirable, but not
inevitable. We’ll have to work to create the future we want.

245
244                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


Those are rough definitions. Let’s get a bit more precise.


Startup Societies

You’re founding a startup society, not a network state.

A startup society is a new community built internet-first, usually for the purpose of
solving a specific social problem in an opt-in way. The implication is that this society
is still pretty small in population.

A parallel society is roughly equivalent to a startup society, but can be much larger in
scale. This is an umbrella term for a network union, network archipelago, or network
state.

And now we have a way to talk about origins in a realistic way. You’re founding a
startup society. You begin as a network union, maybe crowdfund territory to become
a network archipelago, and could someday grow into a network state. All of these are
types of parallel societies.

This communicates the point that there are different paths to a network state, and
different (and completely valid) intermediate end points — just like you can run a
small business, a lifestyle business, do a merger/acquisition, or found a “mere” unicorn
rather than going public and achieving a trillion dollar valuation in the public markets.

I’d roughly calibrate the difficulty of founding a 1M person network state that achieves
diplomatic recognition from at least one city, state, or country at about the level of
founding a 10M person social network or a billion dollar company. Why? Because
small countries like Tuvalu, El Salvador, and the like have already signed business
development deals with startups, so it’s no longer unheard of — just difficult.

However, even if your ultimate goal is a unicorn, you don’t start out by saying “I’m
founding a unicorn.” You say you’re founding a startup.

By analogy, what do you say, rather than “I’m founding a network state”? The closest
thing out there was once “I’m starting a decentralized autonomous organization” (a
DAO). That’s better than “I’m starting a social network,” because a DAO at least
has an implicit concept of national identity, in the form of common coin-holding. A
social network does not have this, because most social networks, by dint of being social
utilities, fly past 1-networks and become N-networks if they are successful. However,
DAOs also are bedeviled by the downsides of markets and politics respectively: fly-by-
night speculators and bureaucratic boondoggles abound.

So, if you want to eventually build a network state, you should instead start by saying
“I’m founding a startup society.”


Parallel Societies

We also use the term parallel society. This is roughly equivalent to a startup society,
but can be much larger in scale. It’s an umbrella term for a network union, network

246
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               245


archipelago, or network state. It emphasizes that you have a possibly huge society
running in parallel to legacy society, with at least one big piece that is wildly different
from the existing world.

We discussed parallel societies in Chapter 2.


The Network Union

A network union is a social graph organized in a tree-like structure with a leader, a
purpose, a crypto-based financial and messaging system, and a daily call-to-action. It’s
the underpinning of the new nation behind a network state. It forms dense peer-to-peer
connections, not simply leader-to-follower. And it acclimatizes its members to working
together as a society towards a common purpose.

That purpose makes it different from a social network like Twitter, a subreddit, or even
a DAO. The purpose isn’t to waste time, or aimlessly speculate on a token. It’s to
advance the collective interests of its members through daily actions, organized by a
network union leader.

That common purpose creates a culture, and gradually turns a group of people into
a 1-network, a network with national consciousness, into the foundation of a network
state. Think about it: if people won’t even show up to vote online, they don’t care
about the community. Conversely, if they’ve managed to do great things together as
part of a network union, they’ll be able to do more.

And that is in fact Renan’s definition of a nation:

        To have done great things together, to want to do more, such are the es-
        sential conditions to form a people. . . Man is not a slave to his race, or his
        tongue, or his religion.

See also this earlier piece on network unions, before we tightened up some of the
definitions.

Public Displays of Alignment

A network union doesn’t just do private actions for the collective benefit of its members.
It also does public actions which show the world at large how organized, aligned, self-
sacrificing, and mutually cooperating the members of the network union are. Call these
public displays of alignment, a decorous riff on the American concept of PDA.

As motivation, think about the many movies that center the tango in a campy-yet-
serious way. Dramatic music plays as man and woman lock eyes across the room
before beginning a series of complicated pirouettes. The dance floor clears a circle as
everyone pauses to watch. The whole room is now paying rapt attention to this couple,
even if they didn’t know them before.

That’s an example of positive-sum attention: because these two paid attention to each
other in a public and synchronized way, others paid respectful attention to them. That

247
246                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


couple must love each other very much — or at least must practice very much — and
their coordination demands admiration. Even the onlooker who doesn’t much care for
dancing must give a grudging nod.

Other examples of positive-sum attention like this include orchestras, parades, the good
kind of flash mobs, basketball games, and the types of gymnastic enterprises common
to college football halftime shows wherein cheerleaders form tall human pyramids that
require complete trust in the people at the base.

All of these are examples of public multi-party coordination where people are creating
art together in a high-trust society. The coordination is pleasing to the eye. But it also
indicates to the audience that the people involved have practiced before, that they’re
aligned, that they aren’t all playing whatever notes they want at whatever time, that
there is some pre-arranged give and take. Public displays of positive-sum attention
show that two or more people can work together as a team.

The opposite also exists: negative-sum attention. When two people who are supposed
to be aligned fight in public, when a corporation like the Washington Post melts down
on Twitter, or when a whole country broadcasts its endless internal conflict to the globe
each day, bystanders have a different reaction. It’s not one of admiration and respect
for the tight coordination. It’s the opposite. The conflict causes a diminution of status
for all parties involved. The phrase “team of rivals” draws our attention because rivals
can’t really make up a team. A organization characterized by public infighting isn’t an
organization, it’s an occasion for popcorn or pity.

Two notes before we move to the main point.

First, the kind of public conflict seen in a hard-fought NBA game or an Oxford-style
debate is different, because a viewer could come away with respect for both winner and
loser. Why? That kind of conflict is between clearly delineated parties, within certain
rules that both entertain and constrain. It’s ritualized conflict, it’s expected. The loser
often gets paid for showing up. So it’s not a lose/lose fight, not a cartoonish bar brawl.

Second, it’s impossible to run any organization of sufficient scale without some degree
of internal misalignment. You don’t get to 500 million friends without making a few
enemies. There’s always someone with hard feelings — the envious, the disgruntled,
the fired. They might start a fight to gain what they could not by other means. The
consequent loss of status that accompanies a public fight is like the loss of money that
accompanies a bad earnings report. It’s not desirable, but it’s absolutely survivable.

To make up for the loss of money, you work harder next time. But to make up for
the loss of status, you take a beat and figure out how to reunify your organization and
show a united front to the world. In a phrase, you need some PDA: a public display of
alignment.

Politicians do public displays of alignment all the time. They trash each other during
the primaries and then raise each others’ hands in the general election. They’re putting
their differences behind them to build a united front. Countries do this too — that’s

248
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               247


what peace treaties, mutual defense pacts, joint military exercises, and international
organizations are all about. The visual of flags flying together shows others that they’re
one unit.

And that brings us to the concept of public displays of alignment for a network union.
It’s important to start by organizing the network union to do private tasks that the
group as a whole benefits from. But eventually you want to show the external world
that your network union can do impressive public things as a group.

So, what’s the digital version of a parade, or of a group singing in unison like the
Estonian Singing Revolution? It might be something like a crypto-Wikipedia, or some
kind of collectively authored art in virtual reality, perhaps like Minecraft or Reddit’s
r/place. It may need to involve proof-of-human so onlookers know that this piece of
digital art involved real people.

But whatever it is, public displays of alignment are away for a network union to not just
quietly deliver value for its members (as it should), but to also publicly demonstrate to
the world that it’s a tightly coordinated unit — and worthy of being treated as such.
Proving to the world that your network union can coordinate like an organic nation is
a first step in the long process towards eventual diplomatic recognition.


The New Tokenomics is Nation Formation

In the 2000s, most technologists didn’t care that much about how national currencies
were run. The parameter choices of a currency were things only central bankers cared
about. What’s the interest rate? Is it a deflationary, inflationary, or even demurrage
currency? Which actors have root access to the system and under what circumstances
can they be deplatformed? And so on.

But all those details and more became important for people founding new currencies.
Thus, the concept known as “tokenomics” arose: setting up the financial and social
incentives of a new cryptoeconomic community in a user- and organization-aligned
way.

Similarly, all previously obscure details of how nations and states formed are newly
relevant to network union founders. There’s an idea maze for nation formation just as
there is for cryptoeconomics. The first question any network union founder needs to
be able to answer is: what is your nation formation strategy?


Path to the Network State

We can now define a path to the network state:

    1. Network union. A wholly digital entity, organized in a social tree structure, that
        engages in collective action on behalf of its members. The collective action is key
        for building organizational muscle.

    2. Network archipelago. A network union that begins acquiring and networking

249
248                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        properties in the physical world. The physical interaction is key for building
        trust.

    3. Network state. A network archipelago that gains diplomatic recognition from at
        least one legacy state. The diplomatic recognition is key for attaining sovereignty.

Of course, the delineation between these categories is fuzzy. For example, a network
archipelago with 100k+ people, billions in annual collective income, and a large physical
footprint around the world could be deemed a shadow network state. It would have
more organization than most stateless nations, as it would actually have a state and
land, just not all in one place. All it would lack is recognition.

Slight fuzziness notwithstanding, this is a realistic path from a single network union
founder to something big.


The Bootstrap Recognizer

We call the first government to recognize a network state a bootstrap recognizer, named
after the computer science concept of a “bootstrap” system that boots up another.

The bootstrap recognizer is to a network state what El Salvador was to Bitcoin: the
formal acceptance of the new system by the old to form something stronger than either
of them individually.

Each network archipelago that wants to become a network state should have a thesis
on who its bootstrap recognizer is. It will likely be an existing state with many “bi-
nationals” that have formal legal citizenship with their existing nation state but have
mentally migrated to become dual citizens of their new network state. The historical
analog is those who identified as Israelis or Indians even before their states became
formally independent.

Note that while a bootstrap recognizer will initially have to be a nation state, once
there are many network states of significant scale, network states could bootstrap the
recognition of other network states.


Digital Civil Society

Network unions, network societies, and other forms of digital civil society are valuable
endpoints in themselves.

For example, a serious open source project could have an associated network union
that advances the collective interest of (say) a guild of ReactJS programmers, without
any need to buy land.

Or a fitness influencer could turn their online community into a network archipelago,
replete with gyms around the world, organizing people to get discounted keto-friendly
food.

250
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               249


You can probably come up with other kinds of structures. The overall idea is to build
digital civil society, all those community organizations that aren’t either the state above
or the isolated individual below, the kind of non-political voluntary associations that
once built America, according to Tocqueville:

        I do not wish to speak of those political associations. . . Here it is a question
        only of the associations that are formed in civil life and which have an ob-
        ject that is in no way political. . . Americans of all ages, all conditions, all
        minds constantly unite. Not only do they have commercial and industrial
        associations in which all take part, but they also have a thousand other
        kinds: religious, moral, grave, futile, very general and very particular, im-
        mense and very small; Americans use associations to give fêtes, to found
        seminaries, to build inns, to raise churches, to distribute books, to send
        missionaries to the antipodes; in this manner they create hospitals, prisons,
        schools. Finally, if it is a question of bringing to light a truth or developing
        a sentiment with the support of a great example, they associate. Every-
        where that, at the head of a new undertaking, you see the government in
        France and a great lord in England, count on it that you will perceive an
        association in the United States.

These had vanished by the year 2000, according to Putnam:

        Putnam draws on evidence including nearly 500,000 interviews over the
        last quarter century to show that we sign fewer petitions, belong to fewer
        organizations that meet, know our neighbors less, meet with friends less fre-
        quently, and even socialize with our families less often. We’re even bowling
        alone.

The network union and network archipelago are ends in themselves. They give us a
roadmap for rebuilding digital civil society, to start doing things together with purpose
and substance online, to move away from the distracting entropy of social media and
the news towards communities of conscious intent. And from these network unions and
network societies, we will form network states.


Recognize Why We Need Recognition

We just described why network states need more than community, and even more
than economic alignment — they need a sense of national consciousness, of collective
purpose, as provided by a network union. Now let’s discuss why we need recognition.

A fun one liner is that crypto made progressives more libertarian and libertarians more
progressive. Progressives discovered that you can build stateless money. Libertari-
ans discovered that you then need to rebuild something much like a state: identity,
reputation, anti-fraud, custody, trust, community, and the like.

We think network states will have a similar dynamic. If they work, they’ll show pro-
gressives a different path to political innovation — rather than grinding through a

251
250                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


thankless legacy system, they can use their organizing skills to help start a new one.

But libertarian founders of network unions will similarly need to take a page from the
progressive playbook. While libertarians are drawn to network states for the same
reason they’re interested in competitive government, seasteading, and micronations,
libertarian literature underemphasizes the necessity of diplomatic recognition.

Diplomatic recognition is as essential to a network state as exchange listing and wallet
support is to a cryptocurrency. There are technical aspects to money, but it is also an
inherently social phenomenon. Contrast this to an airplane, which will fly regardless
of what anyone thinks.

Similarly, while a network union can get started with one person, and even buy land and
become a network archipelago, to cross the chasm it needs a plan for gaining diplomatic
recognition — to go from “unpopular but feasible” to “popular and important.”

Lack of recognition limits sovereignty. In a sense, diplomatic recognition is a partial,
non-binding, but still meaningful commitment from a legacy state to respect the inter-
nal sovereignty of the new network state, to admit it to the family of nations, to open
up a number of different avenues for trade and institutional innovation.

Getting there means the founders of a network union that wants to become a network
state can’t be misanthropic, or even isolationist in mentality. A live and let live men-
tality won’t be enough; you’ll need to recruit people who win and help win. Because
unlike an empire, the end goal of a network state is not world domination; it’s world
recognition.


5.3.9 Why Would we Found a Network State?

But why? Why do we need the ability to found a network state? Why can’t we reform
one of the perfectly good countries on the planet?

First, these countries are not perfectly good. Just as it was easier to start a new digital
currency than to reform the Fed, it may be easier to start a new country than to reform
yours.

Second, we want new countries for the same reason we want blank sheets of paper,
fresh plots of land, or new startups: to begin anew without baggage from the old.

And third, for certain kinds of technologies – particularly transformative biotech like
life extension – we need new jurisdictions with fundamentally different levels of risk-
tolerance, and clear-eyed consent by all who opt in.

There’s something in it for both engineers and activists, for both the technological
innovator and the political progressive.


Network States for the Technological Innovator

Why should technologists care about politics?

252
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               251


      The scientific innovation. Fred Ehrsam wrote that peaceful innovation in gover-
        nance is more important for innovation than we realize. After all, the Catholic
        Church burned proponents of heliocentrism at the stake; it wouldn’t have in-
        vented space shuttles. And the Soviet Union banned photocopiers; it wouldn’t
        have allowed the internet. Today, we see that San Francisco is banning everything
        from scooters to straws, but what we don’t see is what didn’t even make it out
        of the garage.

      The physical world. The state controls the physical world. With sufficient con-
        sent, any law can be changed, and any regulation can be sunset, or reinvented.
        This is how “bits” unlock innovation in “atoms”: we form opt-in communities
        online to unlock innovation oine.

      The economics. Money isn’t everything, but it’s crucial to making something
        sustainable. we know that antiquated taxi regulations held back one hundred
        billion dollars in the form of Uber/Lyft/Grab/Didi, that financial regulations
        held back one trillion dollars in the form of Bitcoin/Ethereum, and communism
        held back the Chinese people to the tune of ten trillion dollars (namely the entire
        Chinese economy).

      The data. Technologists can think of new opt-in states as experiments. Just
        as the ability to start new currencies moved us from observational to empirical
        macroeconomics, the ability to start new countries takes us from the realm of
        political science — the study of what is — to political technology, the engineering
        of what can be.

      The platform. We can think of the state as our most important platform, more
        important even than Apple or Amazon, the place where much of our data and
        lives are hosted. Right now, we can’t upgrade the state. What if we could?

      The ethics. Just as many kinds of things become easier to build in the presence of
        a cooperative centralized server, many more things become easier in the presence
        of a cooperative centralized state. A network state builds a society where everyone
        has broad support for technological innovation. You want a country where people
        cheer Mission Control, not boo Musk and Bezos, and now we can build one.

Of course, network states aren’t for every technologist. If you care mainly about
compilers or programming languages, you can get by under the current dispensation.
And if all you want is a steady paycheck at Big Tech, a network state is not for you.
But if you care about accelerating innovation in the physical world, we finally have an
answer.


Network States for the Political Progressive

Why should political progressives want to start new cities and countries?

      If you’re a young politician, perhaps you don’t want to wait till you’re 70 years
        old to pay your dues and make your mark.

253
252                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


      If you’re a community organizer, network unions give you a digital community to
        organize, sometimes against states and corporations, but also for the benefit of
        individual members’ open source projects, businesses, and consulting gigs.

      If you’re an advocate for a stateless nation like the Catalonians or the Kurds,
        network unions and eventually network states give a new path to recognition.

      If you’re a policy wonk, network states allow you to run ethical experiments on
        policy, with opt-in participants that are as interested in governance innovation as
        you are. You can experiment with digital democracy, new forms of government,
        or anything you think interesting.

      If you’re an idealist, network states bring back the voluntary communes of the
        mid-1800s America, where people could opt-in to build their own vision of utopia.

      If you’re an anarchist, network unions offer a vision of horizontal collaboration
        in the absence of traditional governance and without coercion.

      If you’re an urban planner, network societies allow you to build support and
        amass funding to crowdfund your vision of the good.

In short, whether you want to experiment with reforms or entirely new forms of gov-
ernment, there’s likely something in the concept of network unions, network societies,
and network states that will suit you.

Moreover, these structures are far more democratic than the coercive governance struc-
tures of the legacy system, because they’re all opt-in. 100% of members of a network
union or network state have chosen to be there, rather than 51% imposing their will
on a reluctant 49%. Network states are models for 100% democracy, not merely 51%
democracy.

With that said, the concept of a network state isn’t a panacea. Many political progres-
sives will be attracted to existing governments for one very simple reason: they already
exist, and already have socioeconomic power. You don’t need to build everything from
scratch.

But for the idealists and the ambitious who are excited about the possibility of doing
exactly that, there’s nothing more politically interesting than a new state.


5.3.10 How does a Network State Expand and Contract?

Network states give a wholly new way for states to expand. They can grow peacefully
in the digital world rather than violently in the physical world. The network state
formation process can begin with a single founding influencer and scale to a million
person physical community.

We can break out the underlying vectors of growth as follows:

    1. Demographically. Most obviously, a network state (or a predecessor entity like a
        network union or network archipelago) can grow its userbase through recruitment

254
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               253


        and reproduction. For the latter, the growing state will need some policy to
        recognize the new family members as netizens, such as jus sanguinis.

    2. Geographically. As the citizenry of a network state grows, it can start crowd-
        funding more territory in the physical world. This is a peaceful mechanism for
        territorial expansion. Note that these purchases need not be from sovereign states,
        though they may ultimately be.

    3. Digitally. A complement to geographical growth is digital growth: more domain
        names, crypto usernames, and social media handles under ownership of netizens
        and the network state.

    4. Economically. The people of a network state will earn income and invest on
        chain. Those numbers, or an aggregate thereof, can be made public to the world
        via crypto oracles, thereby showing cryptographically provable growth in GDP
        and net worth.

    5. Ideologically. Because a network state is fundamentally a proposition nation, it’s
        constantly evangelizing its beliefs. But unlike a traditional nation state’s soft
        power, which is not directly tied to immigration policy, here the evangelism is
        explicitly connected to recruiting.

    6. Technologically. Why call this point out separately? Technological progress is a
        defining feature of a network state to an even greater degree than its nation state
        predecessor. A network state understands that in the absence of innovation, its
        at-will citizens will leave for more advanced jurisdictions in the same way people
        left Blockbuster for Netflix. But because technological innovation is non-zero
        sum, the relentless competitive pressure for mobile citizens means the network
        state system is positive-sum, which is very unlike the nation state system’s zero-
        sum struggle for territory.

The network state system is not about the battle for borders, but for backlinks (in a
generalized sense). Many of the things that states traditionally fought over can now
be abstracted and turned into an economic game. This is a step forward, for the same
reason that it was a huge advance whenever nations resorted to trade rather than
conquest to gain access to each others’ natural resources.

What underpins the new dynamic of network states is the intrinsic lack of scarcity of
digital territory, the return of unclaimed land and terra nullius, the reopened frontier.
As we discuss later on, it was this frontier, this room for experimentation, that built
America in the first place. Voice was important, but so was choice.

Thus, just like a tech company or a social network, a network state provides a smooth
path from a single person with a computer and no other resources to a million person
global network. Constant, nonviolent growth is now possible — not by conquest or
coercion, but through volition and innovation.

255
254                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES



5.3.11 What is not a Network State?

As with nation states, it’s useful to give examples that are adjacent to network states,
but don’t quite fit. First, we’ll go over conceptually far away examples; then, a number
of structures that are much closer, which can become network unions, network societies,
and network states.

First, let’s discuss some things that are actually quite far away from network states,
but that are often discussed in the same breath. Each has some important similarities
(a social network, a global physical footprint) but lacks a key dimension.

    1. Your startup. As discussed earlier, don’t go around saying that you’re starting a
        network state. Say that you’re starting a network union, and build up a commu-
        nity that’s capable of doing collective actions online. Then crowdfund territory
        and turn your online community into a network archipelago with physical pres-
        ence. Finally, if all the stars align, gain diplomatic recognition and then declare
        your society a network state. I know this might seem a bit like the Marxist insis-
        tence on the difference between socialism and communism, but the counterpoint
        is that nations have acquired land and gained diplomatic recognition before —
        and we note that it’s important when they do. They just haven’t done it in quite
        this way, with this progression. That’s why we want separate terms for network
        union, network archipelago, and network state.

    2. Twitter, the social network. Twitter is a babble of competing and hostile clans,
        many of whom don’t speak the same language or (even more importantly) share
        the same values. In our terminology, it is very much an N-network, not a 1-
        network. I’m not sure how many true national networks there are within Twitter
        (it’d depend on the parameters of our computational algorithm for national dis-
        tillation), but for the US alone it’s at least two — arguably much more.

    3. WeWork, the coworking space. WeWork’s woes notwithstanding, they built a
        useful product. But it was more like a utility than a true community, more like
        a Starbucks than a small town. Think about it: in a coworking space, the couch
        might be leather and the coffee might be decent, but you don’t leave your laptop
        out of sight because you don’t know anyone there. You need to get a conference
        room to speak freely, you need to use a privacy screen; in general, it’s not a
        high-trust zone. That’s not a true community.

    4. Google, the company. Google the company has a large global physical footprint
        and an even larger digital footprint, with millions of square meters and billions
        of users around the world. It also makes many digital governance decisions per
        day. But its users aren’t a community, and they don’t really think of Google
        as a legitimate government. Conversely, while its employees do call themselves
        Googlers, they think of their employer as a company rather than a country in
        embryo. And they aren’t really at the stage where they want to work hard on
        building a new nation.

256
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               255


    5. Bitcoin, the crypto protocol. There are hundreds of millions of holders of Bit-
        coin worldwide, and the ideas of Satoshi are core to modern thinking on digital
        governance. Nevertheless, Bitcoin does only one thing: facilitate uncensorable
        transactions in Bitcoin. It can be thought of as a meta-government, because it
        constrains network and nation states alike, but it is silent on the 1000 other things
        that even a minarchist agrees a government should do. Moreover, while there is
        some commonality of feeling between Bitcoin holders, there also strong differences
        — Maximalists are only a subset of the community. Overall, the similarity be-
        tween Bitcoin holders is probably more at the level of English-language speakers
        than, say, Japanese-language speakers. They can understand each other, or at
        least understand each others’ premises, but they don’t all have the same vision
        of the good. In short, a digital currency is a prerequisite for a digital country,
        but they are not equivalent.

Next, let’s go through some things which are close to a network state, in the sense
that they can be converted to an (all-digital) network union or a (digital + physical)
network archipelago, but are not quite there.

    1. A political party. A political party is close. It has a shared community, it has a
        sense of self and non-self, it has a vision for governance should it gain power, and
        so on. What it doesn’t have is a “shadow” structure where it can administrate
        the lives of its members even when it is outside of the formal government. It also
        typically doesn’t own property, or formally facilitate the mingling and migration
        of party members. But all that can be done 24/7 without needing to win the vote
        in a general election, and network unionization may become an interesting route
        for any minority party.

    2. A network of hacker houses. If all the people in this network know each other well
        enough to leave their laptop on a couch with the confidence that no one will steal
        it, then it’s a high-enough trust community to be a proto network archipelago.
        It may need to layer on governance.

    3. r/keto. A subreddit for diet, like r/keto, has a community, a governance struc-
        ture via moderators, and a shared purpose. Don’t laugh — strict dietary rules
        have been important for religious practice for centuries, and they are an excellent
        shibboleth for group membership. To build a network union, the members of
        r/keto would need some kind of collective action that members do together (like
        bulk purchases of keto food or reviews of keto books). To turn it into a network
        archipelago, they might need to start keto clubs and restaurants and link them
        together (networked physical territory). Their vision might stop at a cohesive
        society, instead of an all-encompassing state; their network archipelago might be
        part of a network state that rejected not just the USDA Food Pyramid, but also
        the US Fed pyramid schemes.

    4. An influencer or CEO’s following. A popular content creator or CEO is a good
        candidate for pulling together a network union. There’s alignment, there’s an
        existing group, and there’s leadership. But they’d need to figure out a purpose

257
256                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        for their community (if an influencer) or a purpose beyond the merely commer-
        cial (if a CEO). That’ll be easier for activists and technologists, and harder for
        entertainers and pure salesmen.

    5. DAOs and NFT communities. As noted earlier, these are also quite close to being
        network unions, but they need to ensure they have members who are there for
        the long-term cause rather than for the short-term pump. If so, they can start
        pulling together communities of purpose towards collective action.

    6. A city state. This bears mentioning too: a city state is not a network state.
        Why? Because a city state is concentrated in one location, and can be invaded
        by a stronger power, while a network state is geographically decentralized and
        encrypted. It can’t easily be physically invaded without going after all of its
        territories (many of which may be unlisted, or literal single person apartments),
        which would be a politically fraught multi-jurisdiction campaign. And it can’t be
        digitally invaded without breaking the encryption that protects its constituent
        blockchain. So a network state can be thought of as a v3 of the state, that
        combines aspects of the scaled nation states of the 20th century with the nimble
        city states that preceded them. It has the potential massive scale and defensibility
        of a billion person nation state, while preserving the innovation and consent of
        a small opt-in community. It’s similar to how Bitcoin combines aspects of gold
        (v1) with Fedwire (v2) to produce a v3 system.

In short, you need a strong community to even have a chance of building a network
state. Twitter at large is not it, Google Inc is not it, Bitcoin is not it — these lack
either a single self-conscious nation, a functional state, or both.

A political party is closer. A very tight-knit NFT community or influencer/CEO fol-
lowing is even closer. To get on the path to network states, they would first build
digital strength via the network union, then add physical territory via the network
archipelago, and then gain diplomatic recognition in a true network state.


5.3.12 What Technological Developments enable Network States?

Venture capitalists are fond of asking the “why now” question to entrepreneurs. Why
now? Why can we contemplate founding network states today, and not 5 or 10 or 20
years ago? What’s changed in the world?

Well, a lot has changed. Here are some of the key enablers of the network state:

    1. The Internet is to the USA as the Americas were to the UK. Of course, the
        internet enables the whole thing. But the manner in which it enables the network
        state is worth discussing. Think of the internet as a cloud continent, a sort of
        digital Atlantis that came down from the heavens sometime around 1991 and
        has parked itself over the middle of the Pacific Ocean. Every day, everyone who
        spends (say) 8 hours online is doing the equivalent of flying up to this cloud from
        Menlo Park or Tokyo for business or pleasure, and then flying back down. While

258
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                                           257



         there, they see new things, meet new people, and sometimes fight them. So far,
         what we’ve described is much like the settling of the Americas from 1492-1890,
         but there are at least two key differences. First, of course, the cloud had no
         pre-existing people. Second, unlike the vast-but-finite soil of America, you can
         create new digital land ad infinitum in the cloud. As we discuss later on, that
         reopening of the frontier changes everything. It means that the Internet is to the
         USA as the Americas were to the UK: a wide open territory that ultimately gave
         birth to new states and ways of thinking.

    2. Bitcoin constrains legacy states. Bitcoin is the next most important prerequi-
         site for the network state. As a government of governments, it guarantees the
         sovereignty of both the individual citizen and the network state itself. Neither
         can have their funds stolen by each other, or by a hostile third party. Bitcoin has
         also created new fortunes outside the fiat system, demonstrated that institutions
         as powerful as the Fed can be replaced in a few decades, and pioneered an entirely
         new way of designing web services in a decentralized manner.

    3. Web3 enables new chains, decentralized identities, and censorship-resistant com-
         munities. With web3, we can set up a blockchain as the backbone of each network
         state. This is the community chain that the state-appointed leadership has root
         over, as a complement to a public chain like Bitcoin or Ethereum that serves as
         an external check and balance. We can create decentralized identities similar to
         ENS and SNS to serve as digital passports for the network state, defining citizen-
         ship on the basis of single sign-on access to network state services. And we can
         allow not just censorship-resistant communication, but censorship-resistant com-
         munities, voluntary gatherings of people that can exist outside the interference
         or surveillance of legacy states.

    4. Remote and Starlink open up the map. The moment something is put on the
         internet, it becomes remote friendly. And everything is going on the internet.
         Moreover, remote doesn’t just mean around the corner, it means around the
         world. Starlink, and satellite broadband more generally, powers up remote fur-
         ther, by making huge swaths of the map newly economically feasible. Nothing
         now prevents a sufficiently motivated digital community from setting up their
         own Burning Man equivalent in the middle of nowhere, except this time for per-
         manent habitation, and with an eye towards incorporating formal towns and and
         cities. This complements our earlier point: through the internet, we’re reopening
         the frontier, and making previously godforsaken areas of the map much more
         attractive. Unlike past eras, you don’t no longer need to be near a port or mine
         to build a city; you just need to be near an internet connection.

    5. Mobile makes us more mobile. Law is a function of latitude and longitude,
         so if you can easily change your latitude and longitude, you can change the
         law under which you live. That’s why the most important long-term conse-
         quence of the smartphone is Tiebout sorting. That is, all of the assumptions in
         Charles Tiebout’s famous paper from the 50s become feasible with sufficiently

259
258                   CHAPTER 5. FROM NATION STATES TO NETWORK STATES


        advanced phones. With digital nomad search engines like ‘teleport.org‘ and ‘no-
        madlist.com‘, some people can choose who they want, while others move where
        they like.

    6. VR builds a capital in the cloud, AR mirrors it on the land. Virtual reality (and
        more generally the open metaverse) are yet another way in which the obligate
        ties to the land are being cut. We can now build full castles in the sky, and then
        with augmented reality project them onto the earth. For a network archipelago
        or network state, that’s a powerful way to link distributed physical territories
        together into a coherent whole.

    7. Social disintermediated the media. Again, this one is almost too obvious, but so-
        cial media allowed anyone to build a massive following online, it disintermediated
        the legacy media, and (in combination with messaging apps and related tools) it
        made one’s contacts infinitely pportable.

    8. GAFAM showed us what’s possible, startup/VC showed us how. None of the web3
        world would be possible without the web2 and web1 worlds. Google showed us
        what could be done from a garage. Facebook showed us what could be built from a
        dorm room. The entire startup industry has shown us that big things can be done
        on a shoestring. Without the trillion dollar companies and billion user networks,
        we wouldn’t feel like we could build million person network states. In particular,
        as Gilles Babinet observed, once you see partial transfers of sovereignty in the
        digital world, you know more may come. From the postal service to Gmail, from
        taxi medallions to Uber and Lyft, from the banks to Bitcoin, from the maps to
        Google Maps, from the FCC to WhatsApp, from the courts to moderators, legacy
        states control less and digital networks control more. Of course, the former lack
        technical competence and the latter lack democratic legitimacy, which is exactly
        the problem the network state solves.

Next, here are a few things that will be helpful to network states, but are not essential
for their construction:

    1. Land becomes elastic. As Will Rogers once said, “buy land, they ain’t making
        any more of it.” Or are they? Seasteaders and the artificial islands built in
        Dubai show that land supply is perhaps more elastic than we think. We also
        know you can build cruise ships. So it’s possible that we could start reopening
        the frontier physically as well, not just digitally. This isn’t incompatible with
        Georgism, which argues that the inelastic supply of land means there should be
        only one tax, a land tax; it just means the supply is not perfectly inelastic. If
        you combine the two concepts, if more value creation goes online and away from
        the physical world, you get the idea of being able to (a) print more land, and
        (b) partially commoditize existing nation states as providers of land and natural
        resources.

    2. Telepresence changes the nature of immigration. The next step after simply
        projecting in an AR avatar is to dial up a robot on the other side of the world and

260
5.3. ON NETWORK STATES                                                                               259


        start walking around. This should in theory be feasible by combining (a) Boston
        Dynamics’ legged robots, (b) DoubleRobotics’ telepresent iPads on wheels, (c) an
        Oculus Quest headset, and (d) an omnidirectional treadmill. That combination
        of devices could furnish immersive control of a humanoid robot anywhere on the
        globe.

    3. Bits reopen innovation in atoms. Innovation in areas like biomedicine, robotics,
        and energy is not upstream of the network state, it’s downstream of it. The
        network state solves the problem posed by Thiel, Cowen, and J Storrs Hall.
        We’re using bits to reopen innovation in atoms, because innovation in atoms has
        been blocked by regulations, which are in turn created by the US establishment
        and exported all over the world through harmonization. The network state uses
        digital technology to gain sufficient consent in the cloud to build a community,
        crowdfund territory, and eventually gain recognition as a sovereign polity. Once
        we do so, we can return innovation to the physical world.

The nation state was enabled by maps of the world, tools to communicate laws, and
the guns to enforce them. The network state is enabled by the creation of a new world
(the internet), the software to code and communicate policies, and the cryptography
to enforce them.

261
Chapter 6



Appendix




6.1 Acknowledgments

This book took a fair bit of work to put together, and I want to credit the people who
worked closely with me to make it happen.

@zane1729 helped with all aspects of the book, from research and fact-checking to proof-
reading and transcribing to figures to code. @gfodor wrote the entire ebook reader and
site. @jonst0kes coded the commemorative book NFT and managed our community.
@aaraalto did the cover and NFT art. @elijahmadonia worked on figures and web
design, while @0FJAKE and @xenbh helped with book logistics. Their contributions
were invaluable.

Oh, and one more thing. . .
















6.2 About 1729

The publisher of this work is 1729. It’s named after the Ramanujan number, which
symbolizes for us the dark talent: all those people from the middle of nowhere, passed

                                                               260

262
6.2. ABOUT 1729                                                                                                             261



over by the establishment, with crazy-but-correct ideas, who could do great things if
only given the opportunity. These are exactly the kinds of people who we expect will
found startup societies and network states.

It’s also a community for people interested in mathematics, cryptocurrencies, seast-
eading, transhumanism, space travel, life extension, and initially-crazy-seeming-but-
technologically-feasible ideas. . . like network states themselves.

If you want to join us, the first step is to subscribe to the newsletter via the widget
at thenetworkstate.com. You’ll also get free bonus chapters for The Network State as
they are released.

This book grew out of an intellectual detour that became so gripping 
that I decided to abandon my original itinerary altogether. After I had 
made what appeared to be an ill-considered turn, the surprising new 
scenery and the sense that I was headed for a more satisfying destina- 
tion persuaded me to change my plans. The new itinerary, I think, has 
a logic of its own. It might  even have been a more elegant trip had I 
possessed the wit to conceive of it at the outset. What does seem clear 
to me is that the detour, although along roads that were bumpier and 
more circuitous than  I  had foreseen, has led to a more substantial 
place. It goes without saying that the reader might have found a more 
experienced guide, but the itinerary  is so peculiarly  off the  beaten 
track that, if  you're headed this way, you have to settle for whatever 
local tracker you can find. 
     A word about the road not taken. Originally, I set out to understand 
why the state has always seemed to be the enemy of "people who move 
around," to put it crudely. In the context of Southeast Asia, this prom- 
ised to be a fruitful way of addressing the perennial tensions between 
mobile, slash-and-burn hill peoples on one hand and wet-rice, valley 
kingdoms on the other. The question, however, transcended regional 
geography. Nomads and pastoralists (such as Berbers and Bedouins), 
hunter-gatherers, Gypsies, vagrants, homeless people, itinerants, run- 
away slaves, and serfs have always been a thorn in the side of states. 
Efforts to permanently settle these mobile peoples (sedentarization) 
seemed to be a perennial state project-perennial, in part, because it 
so seldom succeeded. 

19
2  Introduction 


     The more  I  examined  these efforts  at  sedentarization,  the  more  I 
came to see them  as a state's attempt to  make a society  legible,  to ar- 
range the population   in ways that simplified   the classic state functions 
of taxation,  conscription,  and prevention  of rebellion.   Having begun to 
think  in  these terms,  I began to  see legibility   as a central  problem  in 
statecraft.  The  premodern  state  was,  in  many crucial   respects,  par- 
tially  blind;  it knew precious  little  about its subjects, their  wealth,  their 
landholdings   and yields,  their   location,  their   very identity.   It  lacked 
anything  like  a detailed  "map"  of its  terrain  and  its people.  It  lacked, 
for  the most part,   a measure, a metric,   that  would  allow  it  to "trans- 
late"  what it  knew  into  a common  standard   necessary for  a synoptic 
view. As a result, its interventions   were often  crude and  self-defeating. 
     It  is at this point  that the detour  began. How  did the state gradually 
get a handle on its subjects and their environment?  Suddenly, processes 
as disparate as the creation  of permanent  last names, the standardiza- 
tion  of weights  and  measures, the establishment  of  cadastral  surveys 
and population  registers, the invention  of freehold tenure, the standard- 
ization of  language and legal discourse, the design of  cities, and the or- 
ganization of transportation   seemed comprehensible as attempts at leg- 
ibility   and  simplification.    In   each  case, officials   took  exceptionally 
complex, illegible,   and local  social practices,  such as land  tenure cus- 
toms or naming  customs, and created a standard  grid whereby  it could 
be centrally  recorded and monitored. 
     The organization   of  the natural   world  was  no exception.  Agricul- 
ture is, after  all,  a radical  reorganization   and simplification   of flora  to 
suit  man's goals.  Whatever  their   other  purposes, the  designs  of  sci- 
entific  forestry  and agriculture   and  the layouts  of plantations,   collec- 
tive  farms,  ujamaa villages,   and strategic   hamlets  all  seemed calcu- 
lated to make  the terrain,  its products,   and its workforce   more legible 
-and    hence manipulable-from      above and  from the  center. 
     A homely   analogy from   beekeeping  may be  helpful  here.  In  pre- 
modem times  the gathering  of honey was a difficult   affair. Even if bees 
were housed in  straw  hives, harvesting  the honey  usually meant  driv- 
ing off  the bees and  often destroying   the colony.  The arrangement  of 
brood chambers and honey cells  followed  complex patterns that  varied 
from hive to  hive-patterns    that  did not  allow for  neat extractions. The 
modern beehive, in  contrast,  is designed to solve the beekeeper's prob- 
lem. With   a device  called  a "queen  excluder," it  separates  the brood 
chambers below  from the  honey supplies  above, preventing the  queen 
from laying  eggs above a certain  level. Furthermore,   the wax cells  are 
arranged neatly  in  vertical  frames,  nine or  ten to a box, which  enable 
the easy extraction   of  honey, wax,  and propolis.   Extraction   is  made 

20
                                                                                              Introduction  3 


possible by observing   "bee space"-the    precise  distance  between the 
frames that  the bees will  leave open  as passages rather than  bridging 
the frames by building   intervening   honeycomb.  From the  beekeeper's 
point of view, the  modern hive  is an orderly, "legible"  hive  allowing  the 
beekeeper to inspect  the condition   of the colony  and the queen, judge 
its honey  production   (by weight),   enlarge  or  contract  the  size of  the 
hive by standard   units,  move it  to a new  location,   and, above all,  ex- 
tract  just  enough  honey  (in  temperate   climates)   to  ensure  that  the 
colony will  overwinter   successfully. 
     I  do not wish  to push the  analogy further   than it  will  go, but  much 
of early  modern  European  statecraft  seemed similarly   devoted  to ra- 
tionalizing   and standardizing  what  was a social  hieroglyph  into  a leg- 
ible  and  administratively    more   convenient  format.   The  social  sim- 
plifications   thus  introduced   not  only  permitted   a  more  finely  tuned 
system of taxation and  conscription  but also greatly  enhanced state ca- 
pacity. They made possible quite  discriminating    interventions  of every 
kind, such  as public-health  measures, political   surveillance,  and relief 
for the poor. 
     These state simplifications,    the basic  givens of  modern  statecraft, 
were, I  began to realize,  rather  like  abridged  maps. They  did not  suc- 
cessfully represent  the actual  activity  of the  society they depicted,  nor 
were they  intended to;  they represented  only that  slice  of it that  inter- 
ested the official  observer. They were, moreover, not just  maps. Rather, 
they were maps that, when  allied with  state power, would  enable much 
of the  reality  they depicted  to  be remade. Thus  a state cadastral  map 
created to designate taxable property-holders   does not merely  describe 
a system of land  tenure;  it creates  such a system through  its  ability  to 
give  its  categories  the force   of law.  Much   of the  first  chapter   is in- 
tended  to convey  how  thoroughly   society  and the  environment   have 
been refashioned  by state maps of legibility. 
     This  view  of  early  modern  statecraft   is not  particularly    original. 
Suitably  modified,  however,  it can  provide  a distinctive  optic  through 
which  a number  of  huge development  fiascoes in poorer  Third   World 
nations  and Eastern  Europe can be usefully  viewed. 
      But  "fiasco"  is too  lighthearted   a word  for  the  disasters I  have in 
mind.  The  Great  Leap  Forward  in  China,  collectivization    in  Russia, 
and  compulsory  villagization   in Tanzania, Mozambique,   and Ethiopia 
are  among  the  great  human   tragedies  of  the  twentieth    century,  in 
terms  of both  lives lost and  lives irretrievably   disrupted.   At a less dra- 
matic  but  far more  common level,  the history  of Third  World  develop- 
ment  is littered  with  the  debris of huge  agricultural   schemes and new 
cities  (think  of Brasilia  or Chandigarh)  that  have failed their  residents. 

21
4  Introduction 


It is not so difficult,   alas, to understand  why so many human lives  have 
been destroyed by mobilized violence  between ethnic  groups, religious 
sects, or linguistic  communities.  But  it is harder  to grasp why  so many 
well-intended  schemes to  improve  the human  condition   have gone so 
tragically  awry. I aim,  in what  follows, to provide  a convincing  account 
of the logic behind  the failure  of  some of the great utopian  social  engi- 
neering schemes of the twentieth   century. 
     I  shall argue  that  the most tragic   episodes of state-initiated   social 
engineering  originate   in  a pernicious   combination   of four   elements. 
All four  are necessary for a full-fledged  disaster. The first element is the 
administrative    ordering   of  nature  and  society-the      transformative 
state simplifications   described  above. By themselves,  they are the  un- 
remarkable  tools of  modern  statecraft;  they are as vital  to the  mainte- 
nance  of  our  welfare   and  freedom  as  they  are to  the  designs  of  a 
would-be  modern  despot.  They undergird   the  concept  of citizenship 
and the provision  of  social welfare  just as they  might  undergird  a pol- 
icy of rounding   up undesirable  minorities. 
     The second  element is  what  I call  a high-modernist   ideology.  It  is 
best conceived as a strong, one  might even say muscle-bound,  version 
of the self-confidence about scientific and technical  progress, the expan- 
sion of production,   the growing  satisfaction  of  human needs, the mas- 
tery of  nature  (including   human  nature),  and,  above all,  the rational 
design of social order  commensurate  with the  scientific  understanding 
of natural  laws. It  originated,  of course,  in the West, as a by-product of 
unprecedented  progress in science  and industry. 
     High  modernism   must not  be confused  with  scientific   practice.  It 
was fundamentally,   as the  term  "ideology"   implies,   a faith  that  bor- 
rowed, as it were,  the legitimacy  of  science and technology. It  was, ac- 
cordingly,  uncritical,   unskeptical,   and thus unscientifically    optimistic 
about the  possibilities  for  the comprehensive   planning  of  human  set- 
tlement  and production.  The carriers  of high  modernism  tended to  see 
rational  order   in remarkably   visual  aesthetic terms.  For  them,  an ef- 
ficient,  rationally  organized  city, village,  or farm  was a city  that looked 
regimented  and  orderly  in  a geometrical   sense. The carriers   of  high 
modernism,  once their   plans miscarried   or were  thwarted,   tended to 
retreat  to  what  I  call  miniaturization:     the creation   of  a more  easily 
controlled   micro-order    in  model   cities,  model  villages,   and  model 
farms. 
     High  modernism  was about  "interests"  as well as faith. Its  carriers, 
even when they were  capitalist  entrepreneurs,  required  state action  to 
realize  their  plans.   In  most  cases, they were  powerful   officials   and 
heads of state. They tended to prefer  certain  forms of planning   and so- 

22
                                                                                              Introduction  5 


cia1 organization (such  as huge dams, centralized  communication   and 
transportation   hubs,  large  factories   and  farms,  and  grid  cities),  be- 
cause these forms  fit  snugly  into  a high-modernist   view  and also  an- 
swered their   political   interests  as state officials.   There was,  to put  it 
mildly,  an elective  affinity  between  high  modernism  and the  interests 
of many state officials. 
     Like  any ideology,  high  modernism  had a particular   temporal   and 
social context. The feats of national  economic  mobilization   of the belli- 
gerents (especially Germany) in  World War I seem to mark  its high tide. 
Not surprisingly,  its most fertile  social soil  was to be found among plan- 
ners, engineers, architects,  scientists, and technicians  whose skills  and 
status it celebrated  as the designers  of the new  order. High-modernist 
faith  was no  respecter  of traditional   political   boundaries;   it could  be 
found  across the political   spectrum  from  left  to right   but particularly 
among  those  who  wanted  to  use  state power   to  bring   about  huge, 
utopian  changes  in people's  work  habits,  living   patterns,  moral  con- 
duct, and  worldview.  Nor  was this  utopian  vision  dangerous in  and of 
itself.  Where it  animated  plans  in  liberal  parliamentary   societies  and 
where the planners  therefore  had to  negotiate with  organized  citizens, 
it could  spur reform. 
     Only  when  these first  two  elements  are joined  to  a third   does the 
combination   become  potentially   lethal.   The third   element  is  an au- 
thoritarian   state that  is willing  and  able to use the full  weight  of its co- 
ercive  power  to  bring  these  high-modernist    designs into  being.  The 
most fertile   soil for  this element  has typically  been times  of war, revo- 
lution,  depression,  and  struggle for  national  liberation.   In  such situa- 
tions,  emergency  conditions   foster  the seizure  of  emergency powers 
and frequently  delegitimize  the  previous regime.  They also tend to give 
rise  to elites  who  repudiate  the past  and who  have revolutionary    de- 
signs for  their  people. 
     A fourth   element  is closely linked  to  the third:   a prostrate  civil  so- 
ciety  that lacks  the capacity  to resist these plans.  War, revolution,  and 
economic  collapse often  radically  weaken civil  society  as well as make 
the populace  more receptive  to a new dispensation.  Late  colonial  rule, 
with   its social  engineering   aspirations   and ability   to  run  roughshod 
over popular   opposition,  occasionally  met this  last condition. 
      In  sum, the  legibility   of  a society provides   the capacity  for  large- 
scale social  engineering,  high-modernist   ideology provides  the desire, 
the  authoritarian    state provides  the  determination   to  act on  that  de- 
sire,  and an incapacitated   civil  society provides  the  leveled social ter- 
rain  on which  to  build. 
      I have not yet explained,  the reader will   have noted, why such high- 

23
6  Introduction 


modernist  plans,  backed by  authoritarian    power,  actually  failed.  Ac- 
counting  for their  failure  is my  second purpose here. 
     Designed  or  planned  social  order  is  necessarily  schematic;  it  al- 
ways ignores  essential  features of  any real,  functioning    social order. 
This truth  is best illustrated  in a work-to-rule  strike,  which  turns on the 
fact that  any production   process depends  on a host  of informal   prac- 
tices and  improvisations   that  could  never be codified.   By merely  fol- 
lowing  the rules meticulously,  the workforce   can virtually  halt  produc- 
tion.  In the same fashion, the  simplified  rules  animating  plans for,  say, 
a city,  a village,  or  a collective   farm  were  inadequate  as a  set of  in- 
structions  for  creating  a functioning   social  order. The  formal  scheme 
was parasitic  on informal   processes that,  alone, it  could not  create or 
maintain.  To the degree that the formal  scheme made no allowance  for 
these processes or actually suppressed them,  it failed both  its intended 
beneficiaries  and ultimately   its designers as well. 
     Much  of this  book can be read  as a case against the imperialism   of 
high-modernist,   planned social  order.  I stress the word  "imperialism" 
here because I am  emphatically  not  making  a blanket case against  ei- 
ther bureaucratic   planning  or high-modernist   ideology. I am, however, 
making  a case against  an imperial   or  hegemonic  planning  mentality 
that excludes the  necessary role of local  knowledge  and know-how. 

Throughout   the  book  I make  the  case for   the indispensable   role  of 
practical  knowledge,  informal  processes, and improvisation  in  the face 
of unpredictability.    In chapters  4 and 5, I  contrast  the high-modernist 
views and  practices  of city  planners  and revolutionaries    with  critical 
views emphasizing  process, complexity,   and open-endedness. Le Cor- 
busier and Lenin  are the protagonists,  with  Jane Jacobs and Rosa Lux- 
emburg  cast as their  formidable   critics.  Chapters  6 and 7 contain  ac- 
counts  of Soviet  collectivization    and  Tanzanian  forced  villagization, 
which  illustrate  how  schematic,  authoritarian   solutions  to production 
and social  order inevitably   fail when  they exclude the fund  of valuable 
knowledge  embodied  in  local  practices.   (An  early  draft  contained   a 
case study of  the Tennessee Valley Authority,  the  United  States' high- 
modernist  experiment  and the granddaddy  of all regional  development 
projects.  It  was reluctantly   swept aside  to shorten  what  is still  a long 
book.) 
      Finally, in  chapter  9 I attempt  to  conceptualize  the nature  of prac- 
tical  knowledge  and to  contrast  it  with  more  formal,  deductive,  epis- 
temic knowledge.  The term metis, which  descends from classical Greek 
and denotes the  knowledge that  can  come only from  practical   experi- 
ence, serves as a useful  portmanteau   word  for  what  I  have in  mind. 

24
                                                                                      Introduction 7 

Here I should also acknowledge my debt to anarchist writers (Kro- 
potkin, Bakunin, Malatesta, Proudhon) who consistently emphasize 
the role of mutuality as opposed to imperative, hierarchical coordina- 
tion in the creation of  social order. Their understanding of the term 
"mutuality" covers some, but not all, of the same ground that I mean to 
cover with "metis." 
    Radically simplified  designs for social organization seem to court 
the same risks of failure courted by radically  simplified designs for 
natural  environments. The failures and  vulnerability  of monocrop 
commercial forests and genetically engineered, mechanized mono- 
cropping mimic the failures of collective farms and planned cities. At 
this level, I am making a case for the resilience of both social and nat- 
ural diversity and a strong case about the limits, in principle, of what 
we are likely to know about complex, functioning order. One could, I 
think, successfully turn this argument against a certain kind of reduc- 
tive social science. Having already taken on more than I could chew, I 
leave this additional detour to others, with my blessing. 
     In trying to make a strong, paradigmatic case, I realize that I have 
risked displaying the hubris of which high  modernists are justly ac- 
cused. Once you have crafted lenses that change your perspective, it is 
a great temptation to look at everything through the same spectacles. I 
do, however, want to plead innocent to two charges that I do not think 
a careful reading would sustain. The first charge is that my argument 
is uncritically admiring of the local, the traditional, and the customary. 
I understand that the practical knowledge I describe is often insepara- 
ble from the practices of domination,  monopoly, and exclusion that 
offend the modern liberal  sensibility. My point  is not that practical 
knowledge is the product of some mythical, egalitarian state of nature. 
Rather, my point is that formal schemes of order are untenable without 
some elements of the practical knowledge that they tend to dismiss. 
The second charge is that my argument is an anarchist case against the 
state itself. The state, as I make abundantly clear, is the vexed institu- 
tion that is the ground of both our freedoms and our unfreedoms. My 
case is that certain kinds of states, driven by utopian plans and an au- 
thoritarian  disregard for the values, desires, and objections of their 
subjects, are indeed a mortal threat to human well-being. Short of that 
draconian but  all too  common situation, we are left  to weigh judi- 
ciously the benefits of certain state interventions against their costs. 
     As I finished this book, I realized that its critique of certain forms of 
state action might seem, from the post- 1989 perspective of capitalist 
trium~halism,  like a kind of quaint archaeology. States with the pre- 
tensions and power that I criticize have for the most part vanished or 

25
8  Introduction 


have drastically  curbed their  ambitions.  And yet,  as I make clear in ex- 
amining  scientific  farming,   industrial   agriculture,   and capitalist  mar- 
kets in general, large-scale  capitalism  is just  as much an agency of ho- 
mogenization,  uniformity,   grids,  and heroic  simplification   as the state 
is, with  the  difference  being  that,  for  capitalists,   simplification   must 
pay. A market   necessarily  reduces  quality   to  quantity   via  the  price 
mechanism  and promotes   standardization;   in  markets,  money  talks, 
not people. Today, global capitalism  is perhaps the most powerful  force 
for homogenization,   whereas  the  state may in  some instances  be the 
defender  of  local  difference   and  variety.  (In  Enlightenment's    Wake, 
John Gray  makes  a similar   case for  liberalism,   which  he  regards  as 
self-limiting   because it  rests on cultural   and institutional    capital  that 
it  is bound  to  undermine.)  The  "interruption,"    forced  by widespread 
strikes, of France's structural   adjustments  to accommodate  a common 
European  currency  is perhaps a straw  in the wind.  Put bluntly,  my bill 
of particulars   against a certain  kind  of  state is by no means  a case for 
politically  unfettered  market  coordination  as urged by Friedrich  Hayek 
and Milton    Friedman.  As  we shall  see, the  conclusions   that  can  be 
drawn  from  the failures   of modern  projects  of social  engineering  are 
as applicable  to market-driven   standardization   as they are  to bureau- 
cratic  homogeneity. 

26
Part  1 



           State Projects of 

           Legibility and Simplification 

28
1       Nature           and       Space 


    Would it not be a great satisfaction to the king to know at a designated mo- 
    ment every year the number of his subjects, in total and by region, with all the 
    resources, wealth & poverty of each place; [the number] of his nobility and ec- 
    clesiastics of all kinds, of men of the robe, of Catholics and of those of the 
    other religion, all separated according to the place of their residence? . . . 
    [Would it not be] a useful and necessary pleasure for him to be able, in his 
    own office, to review in an hour's time the present and past condition of a 
    great realm of which he is the head, and be able himself to know with certi- 
    tude in what consists his grandeur, his wealth, and his strengths? 
    -Marquis de Vauban, proposing an annual census to Louis XIV in 1686 



Certain forms of knowledge and control require a narrowing of vision. 
The great advantage of such tunnel vision is that it brings into sharp 
focus certain limited aspects of an otherwise far more complex and un- 
wieldy reality. This very simplification, in turn,  makes the phenome- 
non at the center of the field of vision more legible and hence more 
susceptible to careful measurement and calculation. Combined with 
similar observations, an overall, aggregate, synoptic view of a selective 
reality is achieved, making possible a high degree of schematic knowl- 
edge, control, and manipulation. 
    The invention of scientific forestry in late eighteenth-century Prus- 
sia and Saxony serves as something of a model of this process.' Al- 
though the history of scientific forestry is important in its own right, it 
is used here as a metaphor for the forms of knowledge and manipula- 
tion characteristic of powerful institutions with sharply defined inter- 
ests, of which state bureaucracies and large commercial firms are per- 
haps the outstanding examples. Once we have seen how simplification, 
legibility, and  manipulation operate in  forest management, we can 
then explore how the modem state applies a similar lens to urban plan- 
ning, rural settlement, land administration, and agriculture. 


The State and Scientific Forestry: A Parable 

    I [Gilgamesh] would conquer in the Cedar Forest. . . . I will set my hand to it 
    and will chop down the Cedar. 
     -Epic of Gilgamesh 

The early modern European state, even before the development of sci- 
entific forestry, viewed its forests primarily through the fiscal lens of 

29
12  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


revenue needs. To be sure,  other  concerns-such     as timber  for  ship- 
building,  state  construction,   and fuel  for  the economic  security  of its 
subjects-were     not entirely   absent from   official  management.  These 
concerns also had  heavy implications   for  state revenue  and security.* 
Exaggerating  only  slightly,  one might   say that the  crown's  interest in 
forests was resolved  through   its fiscal  lens  into  a single  number:  the 
revenue yield of  the timber  that  might be extracted  annually. 
     The best way to  appreciate  how  heroic  was this  constriction   of vi- 
sion is to notice  what fell  outside its  field of vision.  Lurking  behind  the 
number indicating   revenue yield  were not so much  forests as commer- 
cial  wood, representing   so many  thousands  of board  feet  of saleable 
timber  and so many cords of firewood fetching  a certain price.  Missing, 
of course, were  all  those trees, bushes, and  plants holding   little  or no 
potential  for state revenue. Missing as well were  all those parts of trees, 
even revenue-bearing trees, which  might  have been useful to the popu- 
lation but  whose value could not  be converted into  fiscal receipts. Here 
I have in  mind foliage  and its uses as fodder and  thatch; fruits,  as food 
for people and domestic  animals; twigs  and branches, as bedding, fenc- 
ing, hop poles, and kindling;   bark and roots,  for making  medicines and 
for tanning;  sap, for making  resins; and so forth.  Each species of tree- 
indeed,  each part   or  growth   stage of  each  species-had    its  unique 
properties  and uses. A fragment  of the entry  under  "elm"  in a popular 
seventeenth-century  encyclopedia  on aboriculture   conveys something 
of the vast range of practical  uses to which  the tree could  be put. 

     Elm is a timber of most singular use, especially whereby it may be con- 
     tinually  dry,  or wet,  in  extremes; therefore  proper for  water  works, 
     mills, the ladles and soles of the wheel, pumps, aqueducts, ship planks 
     below the water line,  . . . also for wheelwrights, handles for  the single 
     handsaw, rails and gates. Elm is not so apt to rive [split] . . . and is used 
     for chopping  blocks, blocks for the hat  maker, trunks and boxes to be 
     covered with  leather, coffins  and dressers and shovelboard tables of 
     great length; also for the carver and those curious workers of fruitage, 
     foliage, shields, statues and most of the ornaments appertaining to the 
     orders of architecture.  . . . And finally  . . . the use of the very leaves of 
     this tree, especially the female, is not  to be despised, . . . for they will 
     prove of  great relief  to  cattle  in the  winter  and scorching  summers 
     when hay and fodder is  dear. . . . The green leaf of the elms contused 
     heals a green wound  or  cut,  and boiled  with  the bark,  consolidates 
     bone  fracture^.^ 

     In  state "fiscal  forestry," however, the  actual tree with  its  vast num- 
ber of  possible  uses was replaced  by an  abstract  tree  representing  a 
volume  of lumber  or firewood.   If the princely   conception  of the forest 
was still  utilitarian,   it was surely  a utilitarianism   confined  to the direct 
needs of the state. 
     From  a naturalist's perspective,  nearly everything  was missing from 

30
                                                                                      Nature and Space 13 


the state's narrow   frame  of reference.  Gone was  the vast  majority   of 
flora: grasses, flowers,  lichens, ferns, mosses, shrubs, and vines. Gone, 
too, were  reptiles,  birds,  amphibians,  and  innumerable  species  of in- 
sects. Gone were  most  species of fauna,  except those  that  interested 
the crown's gamekeepers. 
     From  an anthropologist's   perspective,  nearly  everything   touching 
on  human   interaction    with   the  forest  was   also  missing   from  the 
state's tunnel  vision.  The  state did  pay attention   to  poaching,  which 
impinged  on  its claim  to revenue  in  wood or  its claim  to  royal  game, 
but otherwise   it  typically   ignored  the  vast, complex,   and negotiated 
social uses of the forest  for hunting   and gathering,  pasturage,  fishing, 
charcoal  making,  trapping,   and  collecting   food and  valuable  miner- 
als as well as the forest's  significance  for  magic,  worship,  refuge,  and 
SO 
     If  the utilitarian    state could  not see the real,  existing  forest for  the 
(commercial)  trees,  if its view  of its forests  was abstract and  partial,  it 
was hardly  unique  in  this respect.  Some level of  abstraction  is  neces- 
sary for virtually   all forms  of analysis, and it is not  at all surprising  that 
the abstractions  of state officials  should  have reflected  the paramount 
fiscal interests  of their  employer.  The entry under  "forest"  in  Diderot's 
Encyclopedic  is almost exclusively  concerned  with  the utilitk  publique 
of forest products  and  the taxes, revenues, and profits  that they  can be 
made to yield.  The forest as a habitat disappears  and is replaced by the 
forest  as an  economic  resource  to  be managed  efficiently   and  prof- 
itably.* Here,  fiscal and  commercial  logics  coincide;  they are both  res- 
olutely  fixed on the bottom  line. 
     The vocabulary   used to organize  nature typically   betrays  the over- 
riding   interests  of  its human   users. In  fact,  utilitarian    discourse  re- 
places the  term  "nature"   with  the term   "natural  resources,"  focusing 
on those aspects of  nature that  can be appropriated   for  human  use. A 
comparable   logic   extracts  from   a more   generalized   natural   world 
those flora   or fauna  that  are  of utilitarian    value  (usually  marketable 
commodities)  and, in turn,  reclassifies those species that compete with, 
prey  on, or  otherwise  diminish  the  yields of the  valued  species. Thus, 
plants  that  are valued  become "crops,"  the species that  compete with 
them  are stigmatized  as "weeds," and  the insects that  ingest  them are 
stigmatized   as "pests." Thus,  trees  that  are valued  become  "timber," 
while  species that compete  with  them become "trash"  trees or  "under- 
brush." The same logic applies to  fauna. Highly  valued animals  become 
'game"   or "livestock,"  while  those  animals  that compete  with  or  prey 
upon  them become  "predators"  or "varmints." 
      The kind  of abstracting,  utilitarian    logic  that the  state, through  its 
officials,   applied  to the  forest is  thus not  entirely   distinctive.  What  is 
distinctive   about this logic,  however, is the narrowness  of its field  of vi- 
sion,  the degree of elaboration  to which  it  can be subjected, and above 

31
14  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


all, as we shall  see, the degree to which  it  allowed  the state to  impose 
that logic  on the very reality   that was ~bserved.~ 
     Scientific  forestry was originally  developed from about  1765 to 1800, 
largely in  Prussia and Saxony. Eventually, it  would  become the basis of 
forest  management  techniques  in   France,  England,  and  the  United 
States and throughout the Third  World.  Its emergence cannot be under- 
stood outside the  larger  context of  the centralized  state-making  initia- 
tives of the period.  In fact, the new  forestry science was a subdiscipline 
of what was called  camera1 science, an effort to  reduce the fiscal man- 
agement of  a  kingdom  to  scientific   principles   that  would  allow   sys- 
tematic  planning.'   Traditional   domainal  forestry   had hitherto   simply 
divided the forest  into roughly  equal plots, with  the number  of plots co- 
inciding  with  the  number  of years in  the assumed growth   cycle.8 One 
plot was  cut  each year on  the assumption  of  equal yields  (and value) 
from plots  of equal size. Because of poor maps, the uneven distribution 
of the  most  valuable  large  trees  (Hochwald),   and  very  approximate 
cordwood  (Bruststaerke) measures, the results  were unsatisfactory   for 
fiscal planning. 
     Careful  exploitation   of  domainal  forests was  all the  more impera- 
tive in  the late eighteenth  century,  when  fiscal officials  became aware 
of a growing  shortage  of wood. Many  of the  old-growth  forests of oak, 
beech, hornbeam,  and linden  had  been severely degraded by  planned 
and unplanned  felling,  while  the regrowth  was not  as robust as hoped. 
The prospect  of declining   yields was  alarming,  not  merely  because it 
threatened  revenue  flows but  also  because it might   provoke  massive 
poaching  by a peasantry  in  search  of firewood.   One sign of  this con- 
cern were  the  numerous  state-sponsored  competitions  for  designs of 
more efficient  woodstoves. 
     The  first   attempt  at  more   precise  measurements  of  forests  was 
made by  Johann  Gottlieb  Beckmann  on  a carefully   surveyed sample 
plot.  Walking  abreast,  several  assistants  carried  compartmentalized 
boxes with  color-coded   nails corresponding   to  five categories  of tree 
sizes, which  they  had been  trained  to  identify.  Each  tree was tagged 
with  the appropriate   nail  until  the sample  plot  had been covered. Be- 
cause each assistant had begun with  a certain number  of nails, it  was a 
simple matter  to subtract  the remaining   nails from  the initial  total  and 
arrive  at an inventory   of trees by  class for the  entire plot.  The sample 
plot had  been carefully  chosen for  its representativeness,  allowing  the 
foresters to then  calculate  the timber  and, given certain  price  assump- 
tions,  the  revenue yield  of  the  whole  forest.  For the  forest  scientists 
(Forstwissenschaftler)  the goal was always to  "deliver  the greatest pos- 
sible constant  volume of wood."9 
     The  effort   at  precision   was   pushed  further   as  mathematicians 
worked  from  the cone-volume  principle   to specify the  volume of  sale- 
able wood  contained  by a standardized  tree  (Normalbaum)  of a  given 

32
                                                                                      Nature and Space 15 


size-class. Their calculations  were  checked empirically   against the  ac- 
tual volume  of wood in  sample trees.1Â The final result of such calcula- 
tions was the  development  of elaborate  tables with  data  organized  by 
tree size  and  age under  specified  conditions    of normal   growth   and 
maturation.   By  radically   narrowing   his  vision  to  commercial  wood, 
the state forester had,  with  his tables, paradoxically   achieved a synop- 
tic view  of the  entire  forest."  This  restriction   of focus  reflected  in the 
tables was  in  fact  the  only  way  in  which  the  whole  forest  could   be 
taken in by  a single optic.  Reference to  these tables coupled with   field 
tests allowed the forester to  estimate closely the inventory,  growth,  and 
yield  of a  given  forest.  In  the regulated,   abstract  forest  of  the  forst- 
wissenschaftler,   calculation    and   measurement   prevailed,   and   the 
three watchwords,  in  modern parlance,  were  "minimum  diversity,"  the 
"balance  sheet," and "sustained  yield." The logic  of the  state-managed 
forest  science  was virtually    identical   with   the  logic  of  commercial 
e~ploitation.~~ 
     The achievement  of German forestry  science in  standardizing  tech- 
niques for  calculating  the  sustainable yield  of  commercial  timber  and 
hence revenue  was impressive  enough.  What  is decisive  for  our pur- 
poses, however, was the  next logical  step in  forest  management.  That 
step was to  attempt  to create,  through  careful   seeding, planting,   and 
cutting,  a  forest that  was  easier for  state foresters  to  count,  manipu- 
late, measure, and  assess. The fact is that forest science and geometry, 
backed by state power,  had the capacity  to transform  the  real, diverse, 
and  chaotic  old-growth   forest  into   a new,  more  uniform   forest  that 
closely resembled the  administrative  grid  of its techniques.  To this end, 
the underbrush  was cleared,  the number  of species was reduced (often 
to  monoculture),    and  plantings    were  done  simultaneously    and  in 
straight  rows  on large  tracts.  These management  practices,  as Henry 
Lowood  observes,  "produced  the monocultural,    even-age forests that 
eventually  transformed   the  Normalbaum   from  abstraction   to reality. 
The German  forest  became the  archetype  for imposing   on disorderly 
nature  the  neatly arranged  constructs   of science. Practical   goals had 
encouraged mathematical  utilitarianism,   which  seemed, in turn, to pro- 
mote  geometric  perfection   as the  outward  sign  of  the well-managed 
forest;  in  turn   the  rationally   ordered   arrangements  of  trees  offered 
new possibilities   for controlling    nature."13 
      The tendency was  toward  regimentation,   in  the strict   sense of the 
word.  The forest  trees were  drawn  up  into  serried, uniform   ranks,  as 
it  were,  to  be measured,  counted  off,  felled,  and  replaced  by  a new 
rank  and file  of lookalike   conscripts.  As an army, it  was also designed 
hierarchically    from  above to  fulfill   a unique  purpose and  to be at the 
disposition   of a single commander.  At the  limit,  the  forest itself  would 
not  even have to be seen; it could  be "read"  accurately  from  the tables 
and  maps in the forester's  office. 

33
                                                 [To view this image, refer to  
                                                 the print version of this title.] 
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  





























1  Mixed   temperate   forest,  part   managed,  part   natural   regeneration 

34
                                                  [To view this image, refer to  
                                                  the print version of this title.] 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   




























2.  One aisle  of  a managed   poplar  forest   in  Tuscany 

35
18  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


     How  much  easier it was to  manage the new, stripped-down   forest. 
With  stands of same-age trees  arranged  in  linear  alleys,  clearing  the 
underbrush,  felling,   extraction,  and  new planting   became a far  more 
routine  process. Increasing  order in  the forest made it  possible for for- 
est workers  to use written  training   protocols  that  could  be widely  ap- 
plied.  A relatively  unskilled   and inexperienced  labor  crew  could  ade- 
quately carry  out its tasks by following   a few standard  rules in the new 
forest environment.    Harvesting  logs  of relatively   uniform   width  and 
length not  only made it  possible to forecast yields  successfully but also 
to market  homogeneous product  units  to logging  contractors  and tim- 
ber merchants.14  Commercial   logic  and  bureaucratic   logic  were,  in 
this instance,  synonymous; it  was a system that promised  to maximize 
the return   of a single  commodity   over the  long haul  and  at the same 
time lent  itself to  a centralized  scheme of management. 
     The new  legible  forest  was  also easier  to  manipulate  experimen- 
tally. Now  that the more  complex  old-growth  forest  had been replaced 
by a forest  in  which  many  variables  were  held constant,   it was  a far 
simpler  matter to  examine the effects of such variables  as fertilizer  ap- 
plications,  rainfall,  and weeding,  on same-age, single-species stands. It 
was the  closest thing  to  a forest laboratory   one  could  imagine  at the 
time.15 The very simplicity   of the  forest  made it  possible,  for the  first 
time, to  assess novel regimens of forest  management under  nearly  ex- 
perimental  conditions. 
     Although  the  geometric,  uniform   forest  was intended   to facilitate 
management and  extraction,  it quickly  became a powerful  aesthetic as 
well. The visual  sign of the well-managed forest,  in Germany  and in the 
many settings  where German  scientific  forestry  took  hold,  came to be 
the  regularity   and  neatness of  its  appearance.  Forests  might  be  in- 
spected in much  the same way as a commanding   officer  might  review 
his troops  on  parade,  and woe  to the  forest  guard whose  "beat"  was 
not  sufficiently   trim   or  "dressed." This  aboveground   order  required 
that  underbrush   be removed   and that   fallen  trees  and branches   be 
gathered and  hauled off. Unauthorized   disturbances-whether      by fire 
or by local  populations-were     seen as implicit  threats  to management 
routines.  The more uniform   the forest,  the greater  the possibilities  for 
centralized   management;   the  routines   that  could  be  applied   mini- 
mized the  need for  the discretion  necessary in  the management  of di- 
verse old-growth  forests. 
     The controlled  environment of the redesigned, scientific  forest prom- 
ised many  striking  advantages.16 It could  be synoptically   surveyed by 
the chief forester;  it  could be more easily  supervised and harvested ac- 
cording  to centralized,  long-range  plans;  it provided  a steady, uniform 
commodity,  thereby  eliminating   one major  source of  revenue fluctua- 
tion;  and it  created a legible  natural  terrain  that  facilitated  manipula- 
tion  and experimentation. 

36
                                                                                      Nature and Space 19 


     This  utopian  dream  of  scientific  forestry   was, of  course, only  the 
immanent  logic  of its techniques.  It  was not  and could  not ever be re- 
alized in  practice.  Both  nature  and the  human factor  intervened.   The 
existing  topography  of the  landscape and  the vagaries of  fire, storms, 
blights, climatic   changes, insect populations,  and  disease conspired to 
thwart  foresters  and to  shape the actual  forest.  Also, given  the insur- 
mountable  difficulties   of  policing   large  forests,  people living   nearby 
typically   continued  to  graze  animals,  poach  firewood   and  kindling, 
make charcoal,   and  use the  forest  in  other  ways that  prevented  the 
foresters' management  plan  from being  fully  realized.17 Although, like 
all utopian   schemes, it fell  well  short  of attaining   its goal, the  critical 
fact is that  it  did partly  succeed in  stamping  the actual  forest with  the 
imprint   of its designs. 
     The principles   of  scientific  forestry   were  applied  as rigorously   as 
was practicable  to most  large German  forests throughout   much of the 
nineteenth  century. The Norway  spruce, known  for its hardiness,  rapid 
growth,  and valuable  wood, became the bread-and-butter   tree of com- 
mercial  forestry.  Originally,  the Norway   spruce was seen as a restora- 
tion  crop that  might  revive  overexploited   mixed forests,  but the  com- 
mercial  profits  from  the first  rotation   were so stunning  that there  was 
little  effort  to  return  to mixed  forests.  The monocropped  forest  was a 
disaster  for peasants who  were now  deprived  of all  the grazing,  food, 
raw  materials,   and medicines   that the  earlier   forest  ecology had  af- 
forded.  Diverse old-growth   forests, about  three-fourths  of which  were 
broadleaf   (deciduous)  species,  were  replaced  by  largely  coniferous 
forests in  which  Norway  spruce  or Scotch  pine were  the dominant  or 
often only  species. 
     In  the short  run, this  experiment  in the radical  simplification   of the 
forest to  a single commodity  was a resounding  success. It was a rather 
long  short run,  in  the sense that  a single  crop rotation   of trees  might 
take  eighty  years to  mature.  The  productivity    of the  new  forests  re- 
versed the  decline  in  the domestic  wood  supply,  provided  more  uni- 
form  stands and more usable wood fiber,  raised the economic return  of 
forest land,  and appreciably   shortened rotation   times (the time  it took 
to harvest  a stand  and plant  another).18 Like  row  crops in  a field,  the 
new softwood  forests were  prodigious  producers  of  a single commod- 
ity. Little  wonder  that  the German  model  of intensive  commercial  for- 
estry  became standard   throughout   the world.19  Gifford   Pinchot,  the 
second chief  forester  of  the United  States,  was trained  at  the French 
forestry  school  at Nancy, which  followed   a German-style  curriculum, 
as did  most  U.S.  and  European  forestry  schools.20 The first  forester 
hired  by the British   to assess and manage the great forest resources of 
India  and Burma  was Dietrich   Brandes, a German.21 By the end of the 
nineteenth  century,  German forestry  science was hegemonic. 
     The  great  simplification    of the  forest  into  a "one-commodity   ma- 

37
20  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


chine" was precisely  the step that  allowed  German  forestry  science to 
become a rigorous  technical  and  commercial  discipline   that could  be 
codified and  taught. A condition   of its rigor  was that  it  severely brack- 
eted, or assumed to be constant,  all  variables  except those bearing  di- 
rectly  on the yield  of  the selected  species and on the  cost of  growing 
and extracting  them. As we shall  see with  urban planning,   revolution- 
ary theory,  collectivization,   and  rural  resettlement,  a whole  world  ly- 
ing "outside  the brackets"  returned  to haunt  this technical  vision. 
     In  the  German  case, the negative  biological   and  ultimately   com- 
mercial  consequences  of the  stripped-down   forest  became  painfully 
obvious only after  the second rotation  of conifers  had been planted. "It 
took about  one century  for them  [the negative  consequences] to show 
up clearly. Many  of the pure  stands grew  excellently  in the first  gener- 
ation but  already showed an amazing  retrogression  in  the second gen- 
eration. The reason for  this is a very complex  one and only a simplified 
explanation  can be given.  . . . Then the whole  nutrient  cycle got  out of 
order  and eventually  was nearly  stopped. . . . Anyway, the  drop of  one 
or two  site classes [used for grading  the  quality  of timber]   during  two 
or three generations  of pure  spruce is a well known  and frequently  ob- 
served fact. This represents  a production  loss of 20  to 30 percent."22 
     A new term,  Waldsterben (forest death), entered the  German vocab- 
ulary to  describe the worst cases. An exceptionally  complex process in- 
volving  soil building,   nutrient   uptake, and  symbiotic  relations  among 
fungi, insects,  mammals, and  flora-which      were, and still  are, not  en- 
tirely   understood-was      apparently    disrupted,   with   serious  conse- 
quences. Most of these consequences can be traced to  the radical  sim- 
plicity  of the scientific   forest. 
     Only  an elaborate treatise  in ecology could  do justice  to the subject 
of what  went wrong,  but  mentioning  a few  of the major  effects of sim- 
plification   will   illustrate   how  vital  many  of the  factors  bracketed  by 
scientific  forestry  turned  out to  be. German forestry's  attention  to  for- 
mal order  and ease of access for management and extraction  led to the 
clearing  of  underbrush,   deadfalls,   and  snags (standing  dead  trees), 
greatly reducing  the diversity  of insect,  mammal,  and bird populations 
so essential to soil-building  processes." The absence of litter and woody 
biomass on the new forest floor  is now seen as a major factor leading to 
thinner  and less nutritious   soils.24 Same-age, same-species forests not 
only created a far  less diverse habitat but  were also more vulnerable  to 
massive storm-felling.   The very uniformity    of species and age among, 
say, Norway spruce  also provided  a favorable habitat  to  all the  "pests" 
which  were specialized  to that species. Populations  of these pests built 
up to epidemic  proportions,  inflicting   losses in yields and large  outlays 
for  fertilizers,   insecticides,   fungicides,  or  rodenticide~.~~ Apparently 
the first   rotation  of  Norway  spruce  had  grown  exceptionally   well  in 
large part  because it  was living  off  (or mining)   the long-accumulated 

38
                                                                                      Nature and Space 2 1 


soil capital  of the  diverse old-growth   forest that  it  had replaced.  Once 
that capital  was depleted,  the steep decline in  growth  rates began. 
     As pioneers   in  scientific  forestry,  the  Germans  also  became  pio- 
neers in  recognizing   and attempting   to  remedy  many of  its undesir- 
able consequences. To this end, they invented  the science of what  they 
called "forest  hygiene." In  place of hollow  trees that  had been home to 
woodpeckers,  owls,   and other   tree-nesting  birds,  the  foresters   pro- 
vided  specially  designed  boxes. Ant  colonies  were  artificially    raised 
and implanted  in the forest,  their  nests tended by local schoolchildren. 
Several  species of  spiders,  which   had disappeared   from  the  mono- 
cropped  forest, were  reintr~duced.~~What   is striking   about  these en- 
deavors  is that  they  are  attempts  to  work   around   an impoverished 
habitat still  planted with  a single species of conifers for production   pur- 
Inpose~.~'  this  case, "restoration   forestry"   attempted  with  mixed  re- 
sults to create a virtual   ecology, while denying  its chief sustaining  con- 
dition:  diversity. 
     The metaphorical  value of this brief  account of scientific  production 
forestry is that  it illustrates  the  dangers of dismembering  an exception- 
ally  complex  and poorly  understood  set of  relations  and  processes in 
order to  isolate a single element of instrumental   value. The instrument, 
the knife,  that  carved  out the  new, rudimentary   forest  was the  razor- 
sharp interest  in the production  of  a single commodity. Everything  that 
interfered  with  the  efficient  production  of  the key commodity  was  im- 
placably eliminated.   Everything  that seemed unrelated  to efficient  pro- 
duction was ignored.  Having  come to see the forest as a commodity, sci- 
entific  forestry   set about  refashioning   it  as a  commodity   machine.28 
Utilitarian   simplification   in the  forest was an effective way of maximiz- 
ing  wood production    in the  short  and intermediate   term.  Ultimately, 
however,  its emphasis  on  yield  and paper  profits,   its relatively   short 
time horizon,   and, above all, the vast array  of consequences it had res- 
olutely  bracketed came back to haunt  it.29 
     Even  in the  realm  of greatest  interest-namely,     the  production   of 
wood  fiber-the      consequences of  not  seeing the  forest  for  the trees 
sooner  or later   became glaring.   Many were  directly   traceable  to  the 
basic simplification   imposed in  the interest of ease of management and 
economic   return:   monoculture.   Monocultures    are,  as a  rule,   more 
fragile  and hence more  vulnerable  to the stress of disease and weather 
than polycultures  are. As Richard  Plochmann expresses it, "One further 
drawback,  which  is typical  of all pure plantations,  is that  the ecology of 
the natural   plant associations  became unbalanced.  Outside of the  nat- 
ural  habitat, and when  planted in pure  stands, the physical condition  of 
the  single  tree weakens  and resistance  against  enemies  decrease^."^^ 
Any  unmanaged  forest  may  experience  stress  from  storms,  disease, 
drought,  fragile  soil, or severe cold. A diverse, complex forest,  however, 
with  its many  species of trees, its full complement  of birds,  insects, and 

39
22  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


mammals,  is far  more  resilient-far       more  able to withstand   and  re- 
cover  from  such  injuries-than       pure  stands.  Its  very  diversity   and 
complexity  help  to inoculate   it against  devastation:  a windstorm   that 
fells large,  old  trees  of one species will   typically   spare large  trees of 
other species as well  as small trees of  the same species; a blight  or in- 
sect attack that  threatens,  say, oaks may leave lindens and hornbeams 
unscathed. Just as a merchant  who,  not knowing   what conditions   her 
ships will  face at sea, sends out scores of vessels with different designs, 
weights,  sails, and navigational   aids stands  a better chance  of having 
much of  her fleet make  it to port,  while   a merchant  who stakes every- 
thing  on  a  single  ship  design  and  size runs  a  higher  risk   of losing 
everything,  forest biodiversity  acts like an insurance policy. Like  the en- 
terprise run  by the second merchant, the simplified  forest  is a more vul- 
nerable  system, especially   over the  long  haul,   as its  effects  on soil, 
water, and "pest" populations  become manifest.  Such dangers can only 
partly  be checked  by the  use of artificial    fertilizers,   insecticides,  and 
fungicides.  Given  the fragility   of the  simplified  production   forest,  the 
massive outside   intervention   that  was  required   to  establish  it-we 
might  call  it  the  administrators'   forest-is     increasingly   necessary in 
order to  sustain it as well.31 


Social  Facts, Raw  and  Cooked 

     Society must be remade before it can be the object of quantification. Cate- 
    gories of people and things must be defined, measures must be interchange- 
    able; land and commodities must be conceived as represented by an equiva- 
     lent in money. There is much of what Weber called rationalization in this, and 
    also a good deal of centralization. 
     -Theodore M. Porter, "Objectivity as Standardization" 

The administrators'   forest cannot  be the naturalists'  forest.  Even if the 
ecological  interactions   at play  in  the forest  were  known,  they  would 
constitute  a reality   so complex  and  variegated  as to defy  easy short- 
hand description.   The intellectual   filter   necessary to reduce the  com- 
plexity  to manageable dimensions  was  provided  by the state's interest 
in commercial   timber  and revenue. 
     If  the  natural   world,   however  shaped  by  human  use,  is too  un- 
wieldy  in  its  "raw"  form  for  administrative    manipulation,   so too  are 
the actual  social  patterns  of  human  interaction   with   nature  bureau- 
cratically   indigestible  in  their  raw  form.  No  administrative   system is 
capable of representing  any existing  social community   except through 
a heroic   and  greatly   schematized  process  of  abstraction    and  sim- 
plification.   It is  not simply  a question  of capacity, although,   like a for- 
est, a human community   is surely  far too  complicated  and variable  to 
easily yield its  secrets to bureaucratic  formulae.  It  is also a question of 
purpose. State agents have no  interest-nor     should  they-in     describ- 

40
                                                                                      Nature and Space 23 


ing an  entire  social  reality,  any more  than  the  scientific  forester   has 
an interest   in  describing  the  ecology  of  a forest  in  detail.  Their   ab- 
stractions  and  simplifications    are  disciplined   by  a small  number   of 
objectives,  and  until   the nineteenth   century   the most  prominent    of 
these were typically  taxation,  political   control,  and conscription.   They 
needed only the  techniques and  understanding   that were  adequate to 
these tasks. As  we shall  see, here  are  some instructive   parallels   be- 
tween the development  of  modern  "fiscal forestry"   and modern  forms 
of taxable property   in land.  Premodern  states were no  less concerned 
with tax  receipts than  are modern states. But,  as with premodern   state 
forestry, the taxation  techniques  and reach  of the premodern   state left 
much to be desired. 
     Absolutist  France in the  seventeenth century is a case in point.32 In- 
direct  taxes-excise    levies on salt  and tobacco, tolls,  license  fees, and 
the  sale of  offices  and  titles-were      favored  forms  of  taxation;   they 
were easy to administer  and required  little  or  nothing  in the way  of in- 
formation  about landholding   and income.  The tax-exempt status of the 
nobility  and clergy  meant  that a good deal  of the landed  property  was 
not taxed at all, transferring   much  of the burden  to wealthy commoner 
farmers and  the peasantry. Common land,  although  it was a vitally  im- 
portant  subsistence resource for  the rural  poor,  yielded no  revenue ei- 
ther.  In  the  eighteenth  century,  the  physiocrats   would   condemn  all 
common  property  on two presumptive  grounds:  it was inefficiently   ex- 
ploited,  and it  was fiscally barren.33 
     What  must strike  any observer  of absolutist  taxation   is how wildly 
variable  and  unsystematic   it  was. James  Collins  has  found  that  the 
main  direct  land tax, the  taille,  was frequently  not  paid  at all and  that 
no community   paid more  than one-third  of  what they were  assessed.34 
The result  was that the  state routinely  relied  on  exceptional  measures 
to overcome  shortfalls  in revenue  or to pay for  new  expenses, particu- 
larly  military    campaigns.  The  crown  exacted  "forced  loans"   (rentes, 
droits ali&n&s) in return  for  annuities  that it  might  or might  not  honor; 
it sold offices  and titles (v&nalit&s d'offices); it levied  exceptional hearth 
taxes (fouages extraordinaires);   and, worst  of all,  it  billeted  troops  di- 
rectly  in communities,   often ruining   the towns  in the process.35 
     The billeting   of troops,  a common   form  of fiscal  punishment,  is  to 
modern  forms of  systematic taxation  as the drawing  and quartering   of 
would-be  regicides  (so strikingly   described  by Michel  Foucault   at the 
beginning  of Discipline   and Punish)  is to  modern  forms  of systematic 
incarceration   of criminals.  Not that  there was a great deal of choice  in- 
volved. The state simply  lacked  both the  information   and the adminis- 
trative  grid  that would  have allowed  it  to exact from  its subjects a reli- 
able revenue that  was more closely  tied to their   actual capacity  to pay. 
As with   forest revenue,  there  was no  alternative   to  rough-and-ready 
calculations   and  their  corresponding   fluctuations    in yields.   Fiscally, 

41
24  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


the premodern  state was, to use Charles  Lindblom's  felicitous  phrase, 
"all thumbs  and no fingers";  it  was incapable  of fine tuning. 
     Here is  where the rough  analogy  between forest  management  and 
taxation begins  to break  down.  In the  absence of reliable  information 
about  sustainable  timber   yield,  the  state might   either  inadvertently 
overexploit  its resources and threaten  future  supply or  else fail to real- 
ize the  level  of proceeds  the  forest  might  sustain.36 The trees  them- 
selves, however, were not political  actors,  whereas the taxable subjects 
of the crown   most certainly   were. They  signaled their   dissatisfaction 
by flight,  by various  forms  of quiet  resistance and  evasion, and, in  ex- 
trernis,  by outright   revolt.   A reliable   format   for  taxation  of  subjects 
thus depended not just  on discovering  what their  economic  conditions 
were but  also on trying  to judge what  exactions they  would  vigorously 
resist. 
     How  were the agents of the state to begin  measuring and codifying, 
throughout  each region of an entire kingdom,  its population,  their  land- 
holdings, their  harvests, their  wealth,  the volume  of commerce,  and so 
on? The obstacles in the path of  even the most rudimentary  knowledge 
of  these matters  were   enormous.  The  struggle  to  establish  uniform 
weights  and measures and  to  carry  out a  cadastral  mapping  of land- 
holdings can serve as diagnostic examples. Each required a large, costly, 
long-term  campaign  against  determined   resistance. Resistance  came 
not only from  the general population  but also from local  power-holders; 
they were frequently  able to take  advantage of the administrative   inco- 
herence produced  by differing   interests and missions  within  the  ranks 
of officialdom.   But  in  spite of  the ebbs and  flows  of the various  cam- 
paigns and  their  national  peculiarities,   a pattern  of  adopting uniform 
measurements and charting  cadastral  maps ultimately  prevailed. 
     Each  undertaking   also exemplified   a pattern  of relations   between 
local  knowledge  and practices   on one hand  and  state administrative 
routines  on  the other,  a pattern  that  will   find echoes throughout   this 
book.  In each  case, local  practices  of measurement   and landholding 
were  "illegible"   to the state in  their  raw  form.  They exhibited  a diver- 
sity  and  intricacy   that  reflected   a great  variety   of  purely  local,   not 
state, interests. That  is to say, they could not  be assimilated into  an ad- 
ministrative  grid  without  being either  transformed  or reduced  to a con- 
venient,  if  partly  fictional,   shorthand.   The logic  behind  the  required 
shorthand  was provided,  as in scientific  forestry, by  the pressing mate- 
rial  interests of rulers:  fiscal  receipts, military   manpower,  and state se- 
curity.  In turn,  this  shorthand  functioned,   as did Beckmann's Normal- 
baume, as not just  a description,  however  inadequate. Backed  by state 
power  through   records,  courts,  and  ultimately   coercion,   these state 
fictions  transformed   the  reality   they  presumed  to observe,  although 
never so thoroughly   as to precisely fit  the grid. 

42
                                                                                      Nature and Space 25 


Forging  the  Tools of Legibility:    Popular   Measures, 
State Measures 

Nonstate forms  of measurement  grew from  the  logic of local  practice. 
As such, they shared  some generic  features despite  their  bewildering 
variety-features      that  made  them  an impediment   to  administrative 
uniformity.  Thanks to  the synthesis of the  medievalist Witold   Kula, the 
reasoning  that  animated  local  practices  of  measurement  may  be set 
out fairly  su~cinctly.~' 
     Most  early  measures were  human  in  scale. One sees this  logic  at 
work in  such surviving  expressions as a "stone's throw"  or "within   ear- 
shot"  for distances  and  a "cartload,"  a  "basketful,"  or  a "handful"   for 
volume. Given that  the size of a cart or basket might  vary from  place to 
place  and that  a  stone's throw  might   not  be precisely  uniform   from 
person  to person,  these units  of  measurement  varied  geographically 
and temporally.   Even  measures that  were  apparently   fixed might   be 
deceptive. The pinte in eighteenth-century Paris, for example, was equiv- 
alent to  .93 liters, whereas in  Seine-en-Montagne  it was 1.99 liters  and 
in  Precy-sous-Thil,  an astounding  3.33  liters.  The aune, a measure  of 
length  used for  cloth,  varied  depending  on  the material   (the unit   for 
silk,  for instance,  was smaller  than  that  for  linen),  and across France 
there were  at least seventeen different  aune~.~~ 
     Local  measures were  also relational   or  "cornmens~rable."~~ Virtu- 
ally any request  for a judgment  of measure allows  a range of responses 
depending  on the  context of  the request.  In  the part  of Malaysia  with 
which  I  am most familiar,   if one were  to ask "How   far is it  to the next 
village?"  a likely  response would be "Three  rice-cookings." The answer 
assumes that the questioner  is interested in  how much  time it  will  take 
to get there, not how  many miles away it  is. In varied terrain,   of course, 
distance in  miles is an utterly  unreliable  guide to travel  time, especially 
when  the  traveler  is on  foot  or riding   a bicycle.  The  answer  also ex- 
presses time not  in minutes-until      recently, wristwatches   were rare- 
but  in  units that  are locally   meaningful.  Everyone  knows  how  long it 
takes  to cook  the  local  rice.  Thus  an Ethiopian   response  to  a query 
about how  much salt is required  for a dish might  be "Half as much as to 
cook a chicken." The reply  refers back to a standard that  everyone is ex- 
pected  to  know.  Such  measurement  practices   are  irreducibly   local, 
inasmuch   as regional  differences  in, say, the type  of rice  eaten or  the 
preferred  way  of cooking chicken  will  give different  results. 
      Many local  units  of measurement  are tied  practically   to particular 
activities.   Marathi  peasants, as Arjun Appadurai  notes, express the de- 
sired   distance  between  the  onion  sets they  plant  in  terms   of hand- 
breadths.  When  one is moving  along a field  row, the hand  is, well,  the 
 most handy gauge. In similar   fashion, a common  measure for twine  or 
 rope is the distance  between the thumb  and  elbow because this corre- 
 sponds with  how it  is wrapped  and stored.  As with  setting onions,  the 

43
26  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


process of measuring is embedded  in the activity  itself  and requires no 
separate operation.  Such measurements,  moreover,  are often approx- 
imate;  they are  only  as exact as the  task at  hand requires.40 Rainfall 
may be said to  be abundant  or  inadequate  if the  context  of the  query 
implies  an interest  in a particular   crop. And  a reply in  terms of  inches 
of rainfall,  however  accurate,  would  also fail  to convey the desired  in- 
formation;   it ignores  such vital   matters  as the timing  of  the rain.  For 
many purposes, an apparently  vague measurement  may communicate 
more valuable  information    than a statistically   exact  figure. The  culti- 
vator who  reports  that  his rice  yield from   a plot is anywhere  between 
four  and seven baskets is conveying more accurate  information,   when 
the focus  of attention   is on  the variability    of the  yield,  than  if  he re- 
ported a ten-year  statistical  average of 5.6 baskets. 
     There is, then,  no single,  all-purpose,  correct  answer  to a question 
implying   measurement  unless we specify  the relevant  local  concerns 
that give  rise to the  question.  Particular  customs  of measurement  are 
thus situationally,  temporally,   and geographically  bound. 
     Nowhere  is the particularity    of customary  measurement  more  evi- 
dent than  with  cultivated   land.  Modern  abstract  measures of land  by 
surface area-so     many hectares or  acres-are    singularly   uninforma- 
tive  figures  to  a family   that  proposes  to  make  its  living   from  these 
acres. Telling  a farmer  only  that  he is  leasing twenty  acres  of land  is 
about as helpful  as telling a scholar that  he has bought six kilograms  of 
books. Customary  measures of  land  have therefore  taken  a variety  of 
forms  corresponding   to those aspects of  the land  that  are of  greatest 
practical   interest. Where  land was  abundant  and manpower  or  draft- 
power  scarce, the most  meaningful  gauge of  land was often  the num- 
ber of days required  to plow  or to weed it.  A plot of  land in nineteenth- 
century  France,  for  example,  would  be described  as representing   so 
many  morgen or  journals   (days of work)   and  as requiring   a specific 
kind  of work  (homke, bechke, fauchke). How many morgen were repre- 
sented by a field  of, say, ten acres could  vary  greatly;  if  the land were 
rocky  and  steeply  pitched,  it  might   require   twice  as much  labor   to 
work  than  if  it  were  rich  bottomland.   The morgen  would   also differ 
from  place to place depending  on the strength  of local  draftpower  and 
the crops  sown,  and  it would   differ  from  time  to  time  as technology 
(plow  tips,  yokes, harnesses)  affected  the work  a  man  could  accom- 
plish  in a day. 
     Land  might  also be evaluated  according  to  the amount  of seed re- 
quired  to  sow it.  If  the soil  were  very good,  a field  would  be densely 
sown, whereas poor  land would  be more lightly  seeded. The amount of 
seed sown to a field  is in fact a relatively   good proxy for  average yield, 
as the sowing  is  done in  anticipation   of average  growing  conditions, 
while  the actual  seasonal yield  would  be more  variable.  Given  a par- 
ticular  crop  regimen, the amount  of seed sown would  indicate  roughly 

44
                                                                                      Nature and Space 27 


how productive   a field had  been, although  it  would  reveal little   about 
how arduous   the land  was  to cultivate   or  how  variable  the  harvests 
were. But  the  average  yield  from  a plot  of  land  is itself  a  rather  ab- 
stract figure.  What  most farmers  near  the subsistence margin  want  to 
know above all is whether  a particular   farm will  meet their  basic needs 
reliably. Thus  small farms  in Ireland   were described  as a "farm  of one 
cow"  or  a  "farm  of  two  cows"  to  indicate   their  grazing   capacity  to 
those who  lived  largely  by  milk  products  and  potatoes.  The physical 
area a farm might  comprise  was of little  interest  compared  to whether 
it would  feed a particular   family.41 
     To grasp  the  prodigious  variety   of  customary  ways  of measuring 
land, we would  have to  imagine  literally  scores of  "maps" constructed 
along very  different   lines than  mere  surface area.  I have  in mind  the 
sorts of maps devised to capture  our attention  with  a kind  of fun-house 
effect in  which,   say, the size of  a country  is  made proportional    to its 
population   rather   than  its  geographical   size, with   China  and  India 
looming  menacingly  over  Russia, Brazil,  and the  United  States, while 
Libya,  Australia,   and  Greenland   virtually   disappear.  These types  of 
customary  maps  (for  there  would  be a  great many)  would  construct 
the landscape according  to  units of  work  and yield, type  of soil, acces- 
sibility,  and ability  to provide  subsistence, none  of which would  neces- 
sarily  accord  with  surface  area. The  measurements  are decidedly  lo- 
cal,  interested, contextual,   and  historically    specific.  What  meets the 
subsistence needs of one family  may not  meet the subsistence needs of 
another. Factors such as local crop  regimens, labor  supply, agricultural 
technology,  and weather  ensure that  the standards  of  evaluation  vary 
from  place to  place and over  time.  Directly  apprehended  by the state, 
so many   maps would   represent   a hopelessly  bewildering    welter  of 
local  standards. They definitely  would  not  lend themselves to aggrega- 
tion  into  a  single  statistical  series  that  would  allow   state officials  to 
make meaningful   comparisons. 


The Politics of Measurement 

     Thus  far, this  account  of local  measurement  practices  risks  giving 
the impression  that,  although  local  conceptions  of distance,  area, vol- 
ume, and  so on were  different  from  and more  varied  than the  unitary 
abstract  standards  a state might  favor, they  were nevertheless  aiming 
at objective accuracy. That impression  would  be false. Every act of mea- 
surement  was an act marked  by the play  of power  relations.  To under- 
stand measurement  practices  in early modern  Europe,  as Kula demon- 
strates,  one must relate  them  to the contending   interests  of the major 
estates: aristocrats,  clergy, merchants,  artisans,  and serfs. 
     A good part  of the politics  of measurement  sprang from  what a con- 
temporary  economist  might  call  the "stickiness"  of feudal  rents. Noble 

45
28  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


and clerical claimants  often found  it difficult   to increase feudal dues di- 
rectly; the levels set for various charges were the result  of long struggle, 
and even a small  increase above the  customary  level was viewed  as a 
threatening breach  of tradition.42 Adjusting  the measure, however, rep- 
resented a roundabout  way  of achieving  the same  end. The local  lord 
might, for  example, lend grain  to peasants in smaller baskets and insist 
on repayment in larger  baskets. He might surreptitiously   or even boldly 
enlarge the size of the grain  sacks accepted for  milling  (a monopoly  of 
the domain  lord)  and reduce  the size of the  sacks used for  measuring 
out flour;  he  might  also collect  feudal  dues in  larger  baskets and pay 
wages in kind  in  smaller  baskets. While  the formal  custom  governing 
feudal dues and wages would  thus remain  intact  (requiring,   for  exam- 
ple, the  same number  of  sacks of  wheat  from  the  harvest of  a given 
holding), the actual  transaction  might  increasingly  favor the lord.43 The 
results of  such fiddling   were  far from   trivial.   Kula  estimates that  the 
size of the bushel (boisseau) used to collect the main  feudal rent  (taille) 
increased by  one-third   between  1674 and  1716  as part  of what   was 
called the reaction f60dale.~~ 
     Even when the unit  of measurement-say,     the bushel-was    appar- 
ently agreed upon  by all, the  fun had just  begun. Virtually   everywhere 
in early modern  Europe  were endless micropolitics   about how  baskets 
might be  adjusted through  wear, bulging,  tricks   of weaving,  moisture, 
the thickness  of the rim,  and so on.  In some  areas the local  standards 
for  the bushel  and other  units  of measurement  were  kept  in metallic 
form  and placed in  the care of a trusted  official  or  else literally  carved 
into the stone of  a church or the  town hall.45 Nor did  it end there.  How 
the grain   was to  be poured   (from  shoulder   height,  which  packed  it 
somewhat, or  from  waist height?),  how damp  it  could be, whether  the 
container  could  be shaken down,  and,  finally,  if and  how it  was to  be 
leveled  off  when  full   were  subjects  of  long  and  bitter   controversy. 
Some arrangements called  for the grain  to be heaped, some for a "half- 
heap," and still  others for  it to be leveled  or "striked"   (ras). These were 
not trivial  matters.  A feudal lord  could  increase his rents by 25 percent 
by insisting  on receiving  wheat and  rye in heaped bushels.46 If, by cus- 
tom, the bushel  of grain was to  be striked, then  a further  micropolitics 
erupted over  the strickle.  Was it to be round,  thereby  packing  in grain 
as it was rolled across the rim,  or was it to be sharp-edged? Who would 
apply the strickle?  Who  could be trusted  to keep it? 
     A comparable   micropolitics,   as one might   expect, swirled   around 
the unit  of  land  measurement. A  common  measure of  length,  the ell, 
was used to mark  off the area to be plowed  or  weeded as a part of feu- 
dal labor  dues. Once again, the lengths and widths  in ells were  "sticky," 
having  been established through   long  struggle.  It  was tempting  for  a 
lord  or overseer  to try  raising  labor  dues indirectly   by  increasing  the 
length  of  the ell.  If  the  attempt  were  successful,  the formal   rules  of 

46
                                                                                      Nature and Space 29 


corvke labor  would  not be violated,  but  the amount  of work  extracted 
would  increase. Perhaps the  stickiest  of all  measures before the  nine- 
teenth century   was the  price  of  bread. As  the most  vital  subsistence 
good of  premodern  times,  it  served  as a kind  of cost-of-living    index, 
and its  cost was the  subject of  deeply held  popular  customs  about its 
relationship   to the typical  urban  wage.  Kula shows in  remarkable  de- 
tail  how bakers,  afraid  to provoke  a riot  by directly  violating   the "just 
price," managed  nevertheless to manipulate   the size and weight  of the 
loaf to  compensate  to some degree  for changes  in the  price  of wheat 
and rye 


Statecraft and the Hieroglyphics of Measurement 

     Because  local  standards   of measurement   were  tied  to  practical 
needs, because they  reflected  particular   cropping   patterns  and  agri- 
cultural   technology,   because they  varied  with   climate   and  ecology, 
because they  were  "an  attribute   of  power  and  an instrument    of as- 
serting  class privilege,"  and because they  were "at  the center  of bitter 
class struggle,"  they  represented  a mind-boggling    problem  for  state- 
craft.48 Efforts  to  simplify   or standardize   measures  recur  like  a leit- 
motif  throughout    French  history -their     reappearance  a sure  sign of 
previous failure.  More  modest attempts to  simply codify  local practices 
and create conversion  tables were  quickly  overtaken and rendered  ob- 
solete by changes on the ground. The king's ministers  were confronted, 
in effect, with   a patchwork  of local measurement  codes, each of which 
had to  be cracked. It  was as if  each district  spoke its  own dialect,  one 
that  was  unintelligible    to  outsiders   and  at  the  same time   liable  to 
change without   notice.   Either  the  state risked  making  large  and  po- 
tentially  damaging  miscalculations   about  local conditions,   or it  relied 
heavily  on the  advice  of local  trackers-the      nobles and  clergy  in the 
Crown's  confidence-who,      in turn,   were not  slow  to take full   advan- 
tage of their  power. 
     The illegibility   of local measurement  practices was more than  an ad- 
ministrative   headache for the monarchy. It  compromised  the most vital 
and sensitive aspects of state security. Food supply was the Achilles heel 
of the  early  modern  state; short  of religious  war,  nothing  so menaced 
the state as food shortages  and the resulting  social upheavals.  Without 
comparable  units  of measurement,  it  was difficult   if not  impossible  to 
monitor  markets,  to compare  regional prices  for basic commodities,  or 
to  regulate food  supplies  effe~tively.~~Obliged  to grope its way  on the 
basis of  sketchy information,   rumor,   and self-interested  local  reports, 
the state often  responded belatedly  and inappropriately.   Equity  in  tax- 
ation,  another  sensitive political   issue, was beyond the reach of  a state 
that  found  it  difficult   to know  the  basic comparative   facts about  har- 
vests and prices. A vigorous effort  to collect taxes, to requisition  for  mil- 

47
30  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


itary garrisons, to  relieve urban shortages, or any number  of other mea- 
sures might, given the crudeness of  state intelligence,  actually provoke 
a political   crisis.  Even  when  it  did  not jeopardize   state security,  the 
Babel of measurement  produced  gross  inefficiencies  and a pattern   of 
either undershooting  or  overshooting  fiscal targets50 No effective  cen- 
tral monitoring   or controlled   comparisons  were possible without  stan- 
dard, fixed units  of measurement. 


Simplification and Standardization of Measurement 

    The conquerors of our days, peoples or princes, want their empire to possess a 
    unified surface over which the superb eye of power can wander without en- 
    countering any inequality which hurts or limits its view. The same code of law, 
    the same measures, the same rules, and if we could gradually get there, the 
    same language; that is what is proclaimed as the perfection of the social orga- 
    nization. . . . The great slogan of the day is uniformity. 
     -Benjamin  Constant, De I'esprit de conquEte 

     If  scientific   forestry's  project  of  creating   a simplified   and  legible 
forest encountered  opposition  from  villagers  whose usage rights  were 
being challenged, the political   opposition  to standard  and legible  units 
of measurement was even more  refractory.  The power to establish  and 
impose local  measures was an important   feudal  prerogative  with  ma- 
terial  consequences which  the aristocracy   and clergy  would  not  will- 
ingly surrender.  Testimony  to their  capacity  to thwart  standardization 
is evident  in the long  series of  abortive  initiatives   by absolutist  rulers 
who tried  to insist on some degree of uniformity.   The very particularity 
of local feudal  practices and their  impenetrability    to would-be  central- 
izers helped to underwrite   the  autonomy of  local spheres of power. 
     Three  factors,  in  the end,  conspired  to  make what   Kula  calls the 
"metrical   revolution"   possible.  First,  the growth   of market  exchange 
encouraged uniformity    in measures.  Second, both  popular  sentiment 
and Enlightenment   philosophy   favored  a single standard  throughout 
France. Finally,  the Revolution  and  especially  Napoleonic  state build- 
ing actually  enforced  the metric  system in France  and the empire. 
     Large-scale  commercial  exchange  and long-distance  trade  tend to 
promote  common   standards  of  measurement.   For  relatively   small- 
scale trade, grain  dealers could transact  with  several suppliers  as long 
as they knew the  measure each was  using. They  might  actually  profit 
from their  superior  grasp of the  profusion  of units,  much as smugglers 
take advantage of small  differences  in  taxes and tariffs.  Beyond a cer- 
tain point,  however, much  of commerce  is composed  of long chains  of 
transactions,  often  over  great distances,  between  anonymous  buyers 
and sellers. Such  trade is greatly  simplified   and made legible  by stan- 
dard weights and  measures. Whereas artisanal products  were typically 
made by a single producer  according  to the desires of a particular   cus- 

48
                                                                                      Nature and Space 3 1 


tomer  and carried   a price  specific  to that  object,  the  mass-produced 
commodity   is made  by no  one in  particular    and is  intended  for  any 
purchaser  at all. In  a sense, the virtue of  the mass commodity  is its re- 
liable uniformity.   In proportion,   then, as the volume of commerce grew 
and the goods  exchanged became increasingly   standardized  (a ton  of 
wheat, a dozen plow tips,  twenty cart  wheels), there was a growing ten- 
dency to  accept  widely  agreed upon  units   of measurement.  Officials 
and physiocrats  alike were  convinced that  uniform   measures were the 
precondition   for  creating   a national  market   and promoting    rational 
economic  action.51 
     The  perennial  state  project  of  unifying   measures  throughout   the 
kingdom  received  a large degree of popular   support  in the eighteenth 
century, thanks  to the reaction  feodale. Aiming  to maximize  the return 
on their   estates, owners  of feudal  domains,  many  of them  arrivistes, 
achieved their  goal in part  by manipulating  units  of measurement. This 
sense of victimization    was  evident  in  the  cahiers  of grievances  pre- 
pared  for the  meeting  of the  Estates  General just  before  the Revolu- 
tion. The cahiers of  the members of the Third  Estate consistently  called 
for  equal measures  (although  this  was hardly   their  main  grievance), 
whereas the cahiers  of the clergy  and nobility  were  silent, presumably 
indicating   their  satisfaction  with  the  status quo on  this issue. The fol- 
lowing  petition  from  Brittany   is typical  of the  way in which   an appeal 
for  unitary  measures  could  be assimilated  to  devotion  to the  Crown: 
"We beg them [the  king, his  family, and  his chief minister]   to join  with 
us in  checking  the  abuses being  perpetrated   by tyrants   against  that 
class of  citizens  which  is  kind  and considerate   and which,   until  this 
day has been unable  to present  its  very grievances  to the  very foot  of 
the throne,  and now we  call on the King  to mete out justice,  and we ex- 
press our most sincere desire for but one king,  one law, one weight, and 
one measure."^ 
     For  centralizing  elites, the  universal  meter was to older, particular- 
istic  measurement practices  as a national  language was to the existing 
welter  of dialects. Such quaint  idioms  would  be replaced by a new uni- 
versal  gold  standard,  just  as  the central   banking  of  absolutism   had 
swept away  the local  currencies  of  feudalism.  The metric  system was 
at once a means of  administrative   centralization,   commercial   reform, 
and cultural  progress.  The academicians of the revolutionary   republic, 
like  the royal  academicians  before  them,  saw the meter  as one of the 
intellectual   instruments  that  would  make  France "revenue-rich,   mili- 
tarily   potent,  and  easily  admini~tered."~~ Common  measures, it  was 
supposed, would  spur the  grain trade,  make land  more productive   (by 
permitting   easier comparisons  of  price and  productivity),   and, not  in- 
cidentally,   lay the  groundwork   for  a  national  tax  code.54 But the  re- 
formers  also  had  in  mind  a genuine  cultural    revolution.   "As mathe- 
matics was  the language of science, so would  the metric  system be the 

49
32  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


language of  commerce  and industry,"  serving  to  unify  and transform 
French society.55A  rational unit  of measurement  would  promote  a ra- 
tional  citizenry. 
     The simplification    of measures,  however,  depended on  that  other 
revolutionary  political   simplification   of the modern  era: the concept  of 
a uniform,  homogeneous  citizenship.   As long as each estate operated 
within  a separate legal sphere, as long as different  categories of people 
were unequal   in  law,  it  followed  that  they  might   also have  unequal 
rights  with  respect  to  measures.56 The idea of  equal citizenship,   the 
abstraction  of the  "unmarked"  citizen,  can be traced  to the Enlighten- 
ment and is evident  in the writings   of the                                     ForEncycl~pedists.~~ the En- 
cyclopedists, the cacophony  among measurements,  institutions,  inher- 
itance laws, taxation,  and  market regulations  was the great  obstacle to 
the French becoming  a single  people. They envisioned  a series of cen- 
tralizing  and rationalizing   reforms  that  would  transform  France into  a 
national  community  where the same codified  laws, measures, customs, 
and beliefs would  everywhere  prevail.  It  is worth  noting  that  this pro- 
ject promotes  the  concept of national   citizenship-a      national  French 
citizen perambulating   the kingdom  and encountering   exactly the same 
fair, equal conditions  as the rest of his compatriots.   In place of a welter 
of incommensurable   small  communities,   familiar  to  their  inhabitants 
but mystifying   to outsiders,  there  would  rise  a single national   society 
perfectly  legible from  the center. The proponents  of this vision  well un- 
derstood that  what  was at stake was not  merely administrative   conve- 
nience but  also the transformation   of a people: "The uniformity   of cus- 
toms,  viewpoints,   and principles   of  action  will,   inevitably,   lead to  a 
greater  community  of  habits and   predisposition^."^^ The abstract grid 
of equal citizenship   would  create a new reality:  the  French citizen. 
     The homogenization   of measures, then, was part  of a larger,  eman- 
cipator~  simplification.   At one stroke  the equality  of all  French people 
before the  law was guaranteed  by the state;  they were no  longer mere 
subjects of  their  lords  and sovereign  but bearers  of inalienable   rights 
as citizens.s9 All the previous  "natural"   distinctions   were  now "denat- 
uralized"   and nullified,   at least  in law.60 In an unprecedented   revolu- 
tionary  context  where  an entirely  new political   system was being  cre- 
ated  from  first  principles,    it was  surely  no  great  matter  to  legislate 
uniform   weights   and  measures.  As  the  revolutionary    decree  read: 
"The  centuries  old dream  of the  masses of only  one just  measure has 
come true!  The Revolution  has given the  people the meter."61 
     Proclaiming   the universal  meter was far  simpler than  ensuring that 
it  became the daily  practice   of French  citizens.  The state could  insist 
on the exclusive use of its units  in the courts, in  the state school system, 
and  in  such  documents  as property   deeds,  legal  contracts,  and  tax 
codes. Outside  these official  spheres, the  metric  system made  its way 
only  very  slowly.  In  spite  of a  decree for  confiscating   toise  sticks in 

50
                                                                                      Nature and Space 33 


shops and replacing  them with  meter sticks,  the populace continued  to 
use the  older  system,  often  marking  their   meter  sticks  with   the old 
measures. Even as late as 1828 the new  measures were more a part  of 
Ie pays legal than of  Ie pays reel. As Chateaubriand  remarked,  "When- 
ever  you  meet a  fellow   who,  instead  of  talking   arpents,  toises, and 
pieds, refers  to  hectares,  meters,  and  centimeters,  rest  assured,  the 
man is a prefect.'I6* 


Land  Tenure:  Local  Practice   and Fiscal  Shorthand 

The revenue  of  the  early  modern  state  came  mainly  from   levies  on 
commerce  and land,  the major  sources of wealth.  For  commerce, this 
implied   an  array  of  excise taxes,  tolls  and  market  duties,   licensing 
fees, and  tariffs.   For landed   wealth,  this  meant  somehow  attaching 
every parcel  of  taxable property   to an individual    or an  institution   re- 
sponsible  for  paying  the  tax  on it.  As straightforward     as this  proce- 
dure  seems in  the context  of  the  modern  state,  its achievement   was 
enormously   difficult   for  at  least two  reasons.  First,  the  actual  prac- 
tices of customary  land  tenure were  frequently  so varied  and intricate 
as to defy  any one-to-one  equation  of  taxpayer  and taxable  property. 
And second,  as was the case with  standardizing    measurement,  there 
were  social   forces  whose  interests  could   only  be  damaged  by  the 
unified  and transparent   set of property  relations   desired by the  state's 
fiscal  agents. In the  end, the centralizing   state succeeded in  imposing 
a novel  and (from  the  center)  legible  property  system,  which,  as had 
the  work  of  the  scientific   foresters,  not  only  radically   abridged   the 
practices  that  the system described  but at  the same time  transformed 
those practices  to  align more  closely with   their  shorthand,  schematic 
reading. 


An Illustration 

     Negara mawi tata, desa mawi cara (The capital has its order, the village its 
     customs). 
     -Javanese proverb 

     A  hypothetical   case of customary   land  tenure  practices  may help 
demonstrate  how  difficult  it  is to assimilate  such practices  to the bare- 
bones schema of a modern  cadastral  map. The patterns  I will  describe 
are an  amalgam of practices  I  have encountered  in the literature   of or 
in  the course  of fieldwork   in Southeast  Asia, and although   the case is 
hypothetical,   it is not  unrealistic. 
      Let us imagine  a community  in which  families  have usufruct   rights 
to  parcels of  cropland  during   the main  growing  season. Only  certain 
crops,  however,  may  be planted,  and  every seven years  the usufruct 

51
34  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


land is redistributed  among resident  families according  to each family's 
size and its number of able-bodied adults.  After the harvest of the main- 
season crop, all  cropland   reverts  to  common  land  where  any family 
may glean, graze their  fowl  and  livestock,  and even plant  quickly  ma- 
turing,  dry-season crops. Rights to graze fowl  and livestock on pasture- 
land held in common  by the village  is extended to all local  families, but 
the number  of  animals  that  can  be grazed  is restricted   according  to 
family  size, especially in  dry years when  forage is scarce. Families  not 
using their  grazing   rights  can give  them to  other  villagers  but  not to 
outsiders. Everyone has the  right  to gather firewood  for  normal  family 
needs, and  the  village  blacksmith   and  baker  are  given  larger  allot- 
ments. No commercial  sale from  village woodlands  is permitted. 
     Trees that  have been planted  and  any fruit   they  may bear  are the 
property  of  the  family  who  planted  them,  no  matter  where  they  are 
now growing.  Fruit   fallen from  such trees,  however, is the property   of 
anyone who  gathers it.  When a family  fells  one of its  trees or a tree  is 
felled by a  storm,  the trunk  belongs  to the family,  the branches  to the 
immediate  neighbors,  and the  "tops"  (leaves and twigs)  to any poorer 
villager  who carries them  off. Land  is set aside for use or leasing out by 
widows  with  children  and  dependents of conscripted   males. Usufruct 
rights  to land  and  trees may  be let  to anyone  in  the village;  the  only 
time they  may be let  to someone outside  the village  is if  no one in  the 
community  wishes to  claim  them. 
     After   a crop   failure   leading   to  a food   shortage,  many  of  these 
arrangements  are  readjusted.  Better-off   villagers  are expected  to as- 
sume some responsibility   for poorer  relatives-by      sharing their  land, 
by hiring   them, or  by simply  feeding  them.  Should  the shortage  per- 
sist,  a council   composed   of  heads  of families   may  inventory    food 
supplies  and  begin  daily  rationing.    In  cases of  severe shortages  or 
famine,  the  women  who  have married   into  the  village  but  have  not 
yet borne  children  will   not be  fed and are  expected to return   to their 
native village.  This  last practice  alerts  us to the inequalities   that often 
prevail  in  local  customary   tenure;  single  women,  junior   males,  and 
anyone  defined   as falling    outside  the   core  of  the  community    are 
clearly  disadvantaged. 
     This  description   could  be further   elaborated.  It   is itself  a simpli- 
fication,  but  it does convey  some of the actual  complexity  of  property 
relations  in  contexts  where  local  customs  have tended to  prevail.  To 
describe the  usual practices  in  this fashion,  as if they  were laws,  is it- 
self a distortion.   Customs are better understood  as a living,  negotiated 
tissue of practices  which  are continually  being  adapted to new  ecolog- 
ical  and social circumstances-including,        of course, power  relations. 
Customary systems of tenure should  not be romanticized;  they are usu- 
ally  riven  with  inequalities   based on gender,  status, and lineage.  But 
because they are strongly   local,  particular,   and adaptable,  their  plas- 

52
                                                                                      Nature and Space 35 


ticity  can be the source  of microadjustments   that  lead to shifts  in pre- 
vailing  practice. 
     Imagine  a lawgiver   whose only  concern  was to respect  land prac- 
tices. Imagine,  in other  words, a written   system of positive  law that at- 
tempted to represent  this complex  skein of property  relations  and land 
tenure.  The mind  fairly   boggles at  the clauses, sub-clauses,  and sub- 
sub-clauses that would  be required  to reduce these practices to  a set of 
regulations  that  an  administrator   might   understand,  never  mind  en- 
force.  And even if  the practices   could  be codified,  the  resulting  code 
would  necessarily  sacrifice  much  of their  plasticity   and subtle  adapt- 
ability.  The circumstances   that  might   provoke  a new  adaptation  are 
too numerous  to  foresee, let  alone specify,  in a regulatory   code. That 
code would   in effect  freeze a  living  process.  Changes in  the positive 
code designed  to  reflect  evolving  practice   would  represent  at  best a 
jerky  and mechanical  adaptation. 
     And  what  of the next village,   and the village  after  that?  Our hypo- 
thetical  code-giver, however devilishly  clever  and conscientious, would 
find  that  the code  devised to  fit  one  set of local  practices   would  not 
travel well.  Each village,  with  its own  particular   history, ecology, crop- 
ping  patterns,  kinship   alignments,   and economic   activity,  would   re- 
quire  a substantially new set of regulations.  At the limit,  there  would be 
at least as many legal  codes as there were communities. 
     Administratively,   of course, such a cacophony  of local property  reg- 
ulations  would  be  a nightmare.  The  nightmare  is  experienced  not by 
those whose  particular   practices   are being  represented  but  by those 
state officials  who  aspire to a uniform,   homogeneous, national  admin- 
istrative   code. Like  the  "exotic"  units  of weights  and  measures, local 
land  tenure  practice  is perfectly   legible  to all  who live  within   it  from 
day to day. Its  details may often  be contested and far  from  satisfactory 
to  all  its  practitioners,    but  it  is completely   familiar;    local  residents 
have no difficulty   in  grasping its  subtleties and  using its flexible  provi- 
sions for  their  own purposes. State officials,   on the other hand,  cannot 
be expected  to decipher   and then  apply  a new  set of property   hiero- 
glyphs  for  each jurisdiction.    Indeed,  the very  concept  of the  modern 
state presupposes a vastly simplified  and  uniform  property  regime that 
is legible  and hence manipulable   from  the center. 
      My  use of  the  term   "simple"   to  describe  modern   property   law, 
whose  intricacies   provide  employment   to armies  of legal  profession- 
als, will   seem grossly misplaced. It  is surely the  case that property  law 
has  in  many  respects become  an  impenetrable   thicket   for  ordinary 
citizens.  The use of the term   "simple"  in this  context  is thus both  rela- 
tive  and ~ers~ectival.   Modern  freehold  tenure  is  tenure that  is medi- 
 ated through    the  state  and  therefore   readily   decipherable   only  to 
 those who have  sufficient  training   and  a grasp of  the state statutes.63 
 Its relative  simplicity   is lost  on those who  cannot  break the  code, just 

53
36  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


as the relative   clarity   of customary   tenure  is  lost on  those  who  live 
outside the village. 
     The fiscal  or  administrative   goal  toward  which   all  modern  states 
aspire is to measure, codify, and simplify  land  tenure in much  the same 
way as scientific  forestry  reconceived  the  forest. Accommodating   the 
luxuriant  variety   of customary  land tenure  was simply  inconceivable. 
The historical  solution,  at  least for the  liberal  state, has typically  been 
the heroic  simplification   of individual   freehold  tenure.  Land is  owned 
by a legal individual  who  possesses wide powers of use, inheritance, or 
sale and whose ownership  is represented by a uniform   deed of title en- 
forced through   the judicial   and police  institutions   of the state. Just  as 
the flora  of the forest  were reduced  to Normalbaume,   so the  complex 
tenure  arrangements  of  customary  practice  are  reduced  to freehold, 
transferrable  title.  In an agrarian  setting,  the administrative  landscape 
is blanketed  with  a uniform  grid  of homogeneous  land, each parcel  of 
which  has  a legal  person  as owner  and  hence taxpayer.  How   much 
easier it  then  becomes to  assess such property  and  its  owner  on the 
basis of its  acreage, its  soil class, the  crops it  normally   bears, and  its 
assumed yield  than  to untangle  the  thicket  of  common  property   and 
mixed forms  of tenure. 
     The crowning   artifact  of this  mighty  simplification   is  the cadastral 
map. Created  by trained   surveyors  and mapped  to  a given scale,  the 
cadastral  map  is a more  or  less complete  and  accurate  survey of  all 
landholdings.  Since the driving  logic behind the map is to create a man- 
ageable and reliable  format  for  taxation,  the  map is associated  with  a 
property   register  in  which  each specified  (usually   numbered)  lot  on 
the map  is linked  to an owner  who  is responsible  for  paying its  taxes. 
The cadastral  map and property  register  are  to the taxation  of land  as 
the  maps and  tables  of  the  scientific   forester  were  to  the  fiscal  ex- 
ploitation   of the forest. 


The Code Rural That Almost Was 

     The rulers   of postrevolutionary    France confronted   a rural   society 
that was  a nearly impenetrable   web of feudal  and revolutionary   prac- 
tices. It  was inconceivable   that they  could  catalogue its  complexities, 
let alone  effectively eliminate  them,  in the  short run.  Ideologically,   for 
example, their  commitment  to equality  and liberty  was contradicted  by 
customary  rural   contracts  like  those used by  craft  guilds,  which  still 
employed the terms  "master"  (maitre)  and "servant"  (serviteur). As rul- 
ers of a new nation-not      a kingdom-they      were likewise  offended  by 
the  absence of  an  overall  legal  framework    for  social  relations.   For 
some, a new  civil  code covering  all  Frenchmen  seemed as if it  would 
be But~ufficient.~~  for bourgeois  owners  of rural  property  who,  along 
with  their  noble neighbors,  had been threatened by the  local uprisings 

54
                                                                                      Nature and Space 37 


of the Revolution   and  La Grand  Peur and,  more generally,  by the  ag- 
gressiveness of an emboldened and autonomous  peasantry, an  explicit 
code rural seemed necessary to underwrite   their  security. 
     In  the  end,  no  postrevolutionary   rural   code  attracted   a winning 
coalition,   even amid  a flurry   of Napoleonic   codes in  nearly  all  other 
realms.  For our  purposes,  the  history  of the  stalemate  is instructive. 
The first  proposal   for  a code,  which  was  drafted  between  1803  and 
1807, would have swept away most  traditional  rights  (such as common 
pasturage  and free  passage through  others' property)   and  essentially 
recast rural  property  relations  in  the light  of bourgeois property  rights 
and freedom  of contract.6s Although the proposed  code prefigured  cer- 
tain  modern   French  practices,   many  revolutionaries    blocked  it  be- 
cause they feared that  its hands-off  liberalism  would  allow  large  land- 
holders  to recreate the  subordination  of  feudalism in  a new guise.66 
     A  reexamination   of the  issue was  then  ordered  by Napoleon   and 
presided  over  by Joseph Verneilh   Puyrasseau. Concurrently,   Depute 
Lalouette proposed  to do precisely what  I supposed, in the hypothetical 
example, was impossible. That  is, he undertook to systematically  gather 
information   about  all local  practices,  to classify  and codify  them,  and 
then to sanction  them by decree. The decree in question would  become 
the code rural.   Two problems  undid  this  charming  scheme to present 
the rural  populace with  a rural  code that  simply reflected  its own prac- 
tices. The first  difficulty   was  in deciding  which  aspects of  the literally 
"infinite   diversity"  of rural  production  relations  were to be represented 
and  ~odified.~'  Even in  a particular    locality,  practices  varied  greatly 
from  farm to farm  and over time;  any codification  would  be partly arbi- 
trary  and  artificially    static.  To codify  local  practices  was  thus a  pro- 
foundly  political    act. Local   notables would   be able  to sanction  their 
preferences with  the mantle  of law, whereas others  would lose custom- 
ary rights  that  they depended on. The second difficulty  was that  Lalou- 
ette's plan  was  a mortal   threat  to  all  the  state centralizers   and  eco- 
nomic  modernizers  for  whom  a legible,  national  property  regime  was 
the precondition   of  progress. As Serge Aberdam notes,  "The Lalouette 
project  would   have brought  about  exactly  what Merlin   de Douai  and 
the bourgeois,  revolutionary   jurists  always  sought to  avoid."68 Neither 
Lalouette's nor  Verneilh's proposed code was ever passed, because they, 
like  their  predecessor in 1807, seemed to be designed to strengthen the 
hand  of the landowners. 


The Illegibility  of Communal Tenure 

      The premodern   and  early  modern  state,  as we have  noted,  dealt 
more  with  communities   than  with  individuals   when  it  came to taxes. 
Some apparently   individual  taxes, such as the notorious  Russian  "soul 
tax," which   was collected from  all  subjects, were actually  paid  directly 

55
38  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


by the  communities  or  indirectly    through  the  nobles whose  subjects 
they were. Failure  to deliver  the required   sum usually led  to collective 
                               Thep~nishment.~~ only agents of taxation who regularly reached to the 
level of the  household  and its  cultivated  fields  were  the local  nobility 
and clergy   in the  course  of  collecting   feudal  dues and  the religious 
tithe. For its  part, the state had neither  the administrative   tools nor  the 
information   to penetrate to  this level. 
     The limitations   on state knowledge were  partly  due to the complex- 
ity and variability   of local production.   This was not the most important 
reason, however. The collective form  of taxation  meant that  it was gen- 
erally in  the interest  of local  officials to  misrepresent  their  situation  in 
order  to minimize   the local  tax and conscription   burden.  To this  end, 
they might   minimize  the  local  population,   systematically   understate 
the acreage under  cultivation,   hide  new commercial   profits,  exagger- 
ate crop losses after storms and  droughts,  and so         The point  of the 
cadastral  map and  land register  was  precisely  to eliminate   this fiscal 
feudalism  and  rationalize   the fiscal  take  of the  state. Just  as the sci- 
entific  forester needed an inventory   of trees to realize  the commercial 
potential  of the  forest, so the  fiscal reformer   needed a detailed  inven- 
tory  of landownership    to realize  the  maximum,   sustainable  revenue 
yield.71 
     Assuming  that the  state had the  will  to  challenge the  resistance of 
the local  nobles and  elites and  the financial   resources to undertake   a 
full  cadastral survey (which  was both  time-consuming  and expensive), 
it faced other obstacles as well. In  particular,  some communal  forms  of 
tenure simply  could  not  be adequately represented  in  cadastral form. 
Rural  living   in seventeenth-  and  early  eighteenth-century   Denmark, 
for  example,  was organized   by ejerlav,  whose members   had certain 
rights for  using local arable,  waste, and forest land.  It would  have been 
impossible in  such a community  to associate a household or individual 
with  a particular    holding  on  a cadastral   map. The  Norwegian   large 
farm  (gard)  posed similar  problems.  Each  household  held rights  to  a 
given  proportion   of  the value  (skyld)  of  the  farm,  not  to  the plot   of 
land; none of  the joint  owners could  call  a specific part  of the farm  his 
own.'*  Although   it  was possible  to  estimate  the  arable  land  of each 
community  and, making  some assumptions about  crop yields  and sub- 
sistence needs, arrive at a plausible  tax burden,  these villagers derived 
a substantial   part  of  their  livelihood    from  the  commons  by  fishing, 
forestry,  collecting  resin,  hunting,   and  making  charcoal.  Monitoring 
this kind  of income was almost  impossible. Nor  would  crude estimates 
of the value  of the commons  solve the problem,   for the  inhabitants   of 
nearby villages  often shared one another's  commons  (even though the 
practice  was outlawed).  The mode of production   in such communities 
was simply  incompatible   with   the assumption   of individual   freehold 
tenure  implicit   in a  cadastral  map.  It was  claimed,  although  the  evi- 

56
                                                                                      Nature and Space 39 


dence is not  convincing,   that  common   property  was  less productive 
than freehold   pr~perty.'~The   state's case against communal   forms  of 
land tenure,  however, was based on the correct  observation that  it was 
fiscally illegible   and hence fiscally  less productive.  Rather than  trying, 
like the  hapless Lalouette,  to  bring  the map  into  line  with  reality,  the 
historical  resolution   has generally been for  the state to impose a prop- 
erty system in  line with  its  fiscal grid. 
     As long  as common property  was  abundant  and had essentially  no 
fiscal value,  the illegibility    of its  tenure  was no problem.   But the  mo- 
ment it  became scarce (when  "nature"  became "natural  resources"),  it 
became the subject of property   rights  in law, whether  of the state or  of 
the citizens.  The history   of property  in  this  sense has meant the inex- 
orable  incorporation   of what  were  once thought  of as free gifts  of na- 
ture: forests,  game, wasteland, prairie,  subsurface minerals,  water  and 
watercourses,  air  rights   (rights  to the  air  above buildings   or  surface 
area), breathable   air, and even  genetic sequences, into  a property  re- 
gime. In  the case of common-property  farmland,  the imposition  of free- 
hold  property  was  clarifying   not so  much for  the  local  inhabitants- 
the customary  structure of rights  had always been clear enough to them 
-as    it was  for  the tax  official  and  the land  speculator.  The cadastral 
map added documentary  intelligence  to  state power and thus provided 
the basis for  the synoptic  view  of the state and  a supralocal  market  in 
land.74 
     An  example  may  help  to  clarify   the  process  of installing    a new, 
more  legible  property  regime.  The case of two  prerevolutionary    Rus- 
sian villages  provides   a nearly  textbook  example  of state attempts  to 
create individual   tenure  in keeping  with  its convictions   about agricul- 
tural  growth  and administrative   order. Most  of rural  Russia, even after 
the emancipation   of 1 86 1, was a model of fiscal illegibility.  Communal 
forms  of tenure  prevailed,  and  the state had  little  or  no knowledge  of 
who  cultivated   which  strips  of  land or  what  their  yields  and  income 
were. 
     Novoselok   village  had  a varied   economy  of  cultivation,   grazing, 
and forestry,  whereas Khotynitsa  village  was limited  to cultivation   and 
some grazing   (figures  3 and 4). The  complex  welter  of strips  was de- 
signed to ensure  that each village  household received  a strip of land  in 
every ecological  zone. An individual   household  might have as many as 
ten to  fifteen different   plots constituting   something of  a representative 
sample  of the village's  ecological zones and  microclimates.   The distri- 
bution  spread a family's  risks prudently,  and from  time to time  the land 
was reshuffled  as families  grew or  shrunk.75 
      It  was enough  to make  the head  of a cadastral  surveyor  swim.  At 
first  glance it  seems as if the village  itself would  need a staff  of profes- 
sional  surveyors  to get things  right.  But  in practice   the system, called 
interstripping,   was  quite simple to those who  lived it. The strips  of land 

57
40  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 



















                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         


















3. Novoselok village before the Stolypin Reform 


were  generally  straight  and  parallel   so that  a readjustment   could  be 
made  by moving   small  stakes along  just  one side  of a  field,  without 
having  to think   of areal  dimensions.  Where  the other  end of  the field 
was not parallel,   the stakes could be shifted  to compensate for  the fact 
that  the strip  lay toward  the narrower   or  wider  end of the field.  Irreg- 
ular  fields were  divided,  not according  to  area, but according  to yield. 
To the eye-and    certainly  to those involved in  cadastral mapping-    the 
pattern  seemed convoluted and irrational.   But  to those familiar  with  it, 
it  was simple enough  and worked  admirably  for  their  purposes. 

58
                                                                                      Nature and Space 41 
















                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         
















4. Khotynitsa village before the Stolypin Reform 


     The dream  of state  officials  and agrarian   reformers,   at least since 
emancipation,  was  to transform   the open-field  system into  a series of 
consolidated,   independent   farmsteads  on  what  they  took  to  be  the 
western European  model.  They were driven  by the  desire to break  the 
hold  of  the  community   over  the  individual   household   and  to move 
from  collective taxation  of the  whole community   to a tax on individual 
landholders.  As  in France,  fiscal  goals were  very  much connected  to 
reigning  ideas of agricultural   progress.  Under  Count Sergei Witte  and 
Petr Stolypin,   as George Yaney notes, plans for  reform  shared  a com- 
mon  vision  of  how  things   were  and  how  they  needed  to  be:  "First 
tableau:  poor  peasants, crowded  together   in villages,   suffering  from 
hunger, running   into  each other  with  their  plows  on  their  tiny  strips. 
Second tableau:   agriculture   specialist  agent  leads a few  progressive 

59
42  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 



















                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         


















5. Novoselok village after the Stolypin Reform 


peasants off to  new lands,  leaving  those remaining  more  room.  Third 
tableau:  departing   peasants,  freed  from   restraints   of  strips,  set  up 
khutor  [integral  farmsteads with  dwellings]  on new fields and adapt lat- 
est methods. Those who  remain,  freed of village  and family  restraints, 
plunge  into  a demand economy-all      are richer,  more productive,   the 
cities  get fed, and the peasants are not                                     Itpr~letarianized."~~was  abun- 
dantly   clear  that  the  prejudicial   attitude   toward   interstripping    was 
based as much on the autonomy  of the Russian village, its  illegibility   to 
outsiders,  and prevailing   dogma about  scientific  agriculture   as it was 

60
                                                                                      Nature and Space 43 















                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         














6. Khotynitsa village after the Stolypin Reform 


on hard evidence."  The state officials  and agrarian  reformers  reasoned 
that, once  given a  consolidated,  private  plot,  the  peasant would   sud- 
denly  want  to  get  rich   and  would   organize   his  household  into   an 
efficient workforce   and take up scientific  agriculture.   The Stolypin  Re- 
form therefore  went  forward,  and cadastral  order  was brought  to both 
villages in  the wake of the  reform  (figures 5 and  6). 
     In  Novoselok  village,  seventeen  independent  farmsteads   (khutor) 
were created  in  a way  that  aimed  to give  each household  a  share of 
meadow, arable, and forest.  In Khotynitsa  village,  ten khutor  were cre- 
ated as well as seventy-eight farms (otrub),  whose owners  continued to 
dwell  in the village  center.  As a cadastral  matter,  the new farms  were 
mappable,  easily legible  from  above and outside,  and, since  each was 
owned by an identifiable   person, assessable. 
     Taken alone, the maps shown in figures 5 and 6 are misleading. Such 
model villages suggest efficient  cadastral teams working   their  way dili- 
gently through the countryside  and turning  open-field chaos into tidy  lit- 

61
44  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


tie farms. Reality  was something else. In fact, the dream  of orderly, rec- 
tangular  fields  was approximated   only  on  newly  settled  land,  where 
the surveyor faced little  geographical  or social resi~tance.~~ Elsewhere, 
the reformers  were  generally  thwarted,   despite tremendous  pressure 
to produce integral  farms.  There were unauthorized  consolidations,  al- 
though they were  forbidden;  there were also "paper  consolidations,"  in 
which  the new  farmers continued   to farm  their  strips  as before.79 The 
best evidence that the  agricultural   property  system had in  fact not  be- 
come legible to  central  tax officials  was the immensely  damaging  pro- 
curement  policies   pursued  by the  czarist  government   during   World 
War I. No  one knew  what a reasonable  levy on  grain  or draft  animals 
might be; as a result, some farmers were  ruined, while  others managed 
to hoard grain  and                           Thelivesto~k.~~ same experience of forced procure- 
ment without   adequate knowledge of landholdings   and wealth  was re- 
peated again  after  the  October  Revolution  during   the  period  of War 
C~mmunism.~~ 


The Cadastral Map as Objective Information for Outsiders 

     The value of the cadastral  map to the state lies in its abstraction  and 
universality.  In  principle,   at least, the same objective  standard  can be 
applied  throughout  the  nation, regardless  of local  context,  to produce 
a complete  and  unambiguous   map of  all  landed  property.  The  com- 
pleteness of the cadastral map depends, in a curious way, on its abstract 
sketchiness, its lack of detail-its     thinness. Taken alone, it is essentially 
a geometric  representation  of the borders  or frontiers  between parcels 
of land. What  lies inside the parcel  is left blank-unspecified-since         it 
is not germane to  the map plotting  itself. 
     Surely  many  things about  a parcel  of land  are far  more  important 
than  its surface  area and the  location  of its  boundaries.  What  kind  of 
soil it  has, what  crops can be grown  on  it, how  hard it  is to work,   and 
how  close it  is  to  a market  are  the  first  questions  a potential   buyer 
might  ask. These are questions  a tax assessor would  also want to  ask. 
From  a capitalist  perspective,  the physical  dimensions  of land  are be- 
side the  point.  But  these  other  qualities  can  become  relevant  (espe- 
cially  to the  state) only  after the  terrain  to  which  they apply  has been 
located and measured.  And unlike  identifying  location   and dimension, 
identifying   these qualities   involves judgments   that  are complex,  sus- 
ceptible  to fraud,   and easily overtaken  by  events. Crop  rotations  and 
yields may  change, new tools  or machines  may transform   cultivation, 
and  markets  may shift.  The cadastral   survey, by  contrast,  is precise, 
schematic,  general,  and uniform.   Whatever  its other  defects,  it is  the 
precondition   of a tax regimen  that  comprehensively  links  every patch 
of land  with  its  owner-the     taxpayer.82 In this  spirit,  the survey  for  a 
1807 Dutch  land tax  (inspired  by Napoleonic  France)  stressed that  all 

62
                                                                                      Nature and Space 45 


surveyors were to use the same measurements,  surveyors' instruments 
were to  be periodically   inspected  to ensure  conformity,   and all  maps 
were to be drawn  up on  a uniform  scale of  1:2,880.83 
     Land  maps  in  general  and  cadastral   maps  in  particular   are  de- 
signed to  make  the local   situation  legible  to  an  outsider.  For purely 
local purposes,  a cadastral  map  was redundant.  Everyone  knew  who 
held, say, the meadow  by  the river,  the value  of the  fodder  it yielded, 
and the feudal  dues  it carried;   there was  no need to  know  its precise 
dimensions.  A substantial  domain  might   have the kind  of  prose map, 
or terrier,  that  one finds  in old  deeds ("from  the  large  oak tree,  north 
120 feet  to  the  river  bank,   thence  . .  ."),  with  a  notation   about  the 
holder's  obligations   to  the  domain.  One  imagines  such  a document 
proving  valuable to  a young heir, new to the management  of a domain. 
But a proper  map seems to have come into  use especially when a brisk 
market  in land  developed.  The Netherlands  was thus  a leader  in land 
mapping   because of  its  early  commercialization     and  because each 
speculator  who invested  in the draining  of  land by windmill   wanted  to 
know  in  advance  precisely   what  plot   of the  newly   opened  land  he 
would  be entitled  to. The map  was especially  crucial  to the new  bour- 
geois owners  of  landed estates, for  it  allowed  them  to  survey a large 
territory   at a glance.  Its miniaturization     helped it  to serve as an aide- 
memoire  when  the  property   consisted  of many  small  parcels  or  the 
owner  was not intimately   familiar   with  the terrain. 
     As early  as  1607, an English   surveyor, John  Norden,  sold his  ser- 
vices to the aristocracy  on the premise that the map was a substitute  for 
the tour  of inspection:   "A plot rightly   drawne by true  information,   dis- 
cribeth  so the lively image of a manor, and every branch and member  of 
the same, as the  lord  sitting  in his  chayre, may  see what he hath,  and 
where and how  he lyeth, and in whole  use and occupation  of every par- 
ticular  is upon  suddaine view."84A  national tax administration  requires 
the same logic: a legible, bureaucratic  formula   which a new official  can 
quickly  grasp and administer   from the  documents in his  office. 


What Is Missing in This Picture? 

     Administrative man recognizes that the world he perceives is a drastically 
     simplified model of the buzzing, blooming confusion that constitutes the real 
     world. He is content with the gross simplification because he believes that the 
     real world is mostly empty-that most of the facts of the real world have no 
     great relevance to any particular situation he is facing and that most signifi- 
     cant chains of causes and consequences are short and simple. 
      -Herbert  Simon 

      Isaiah  Berlin,  in his  study of Tolstoy, compared  the hedgehog, who 
knew  "one big thing,"  to the  fox, who knew  many things.  The scientific 

63
46  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


forester and  the cadastral  official   are like  the  hedgehog. The sharply 
focused interest  of the  scientific  foresters  in  commercial   lumber  and 
that of the cadastral  officials  in land revenue  constrain  them to finding 
clear-cut  answers to  one question.  The  naturalist  and  the farmer,  on 
the other hand,  are like  the fox. They know  a great  many things  about 
forests and  cultivable   land. Although   the forester's   and cadastral  of- 
ficial's  range of knowledge   is far  narrower,  we should  not  forget  that 
their  knowledge  is systematic and  synoptic,  allowing  them  to see and 
understand  things a fox  would  not grasp.85 What I want  to emphasize 
here, however,  is  how  this  knowledge  is  gained  at the  expense of  a 
rather static  and myopic  view  of land tenure. 
     The cadastral  map  is very much  like  a still  photograph   of the cur- 
rent in  a river.  It represents  the parcels of  land as they were  arranged 
and owned at  the moment  the survey was  conducted.  But the  current 
is always moving,  and in periods of  major social  upheaval and growth, 
a cadastral  survey may  freeze a scene of great  turbulen~e.~~Changes  
are taking  place on field  boundaries;  land  is being  subdivided  or con- 
solidated by inheritance   or purchase;  new canals, roads,  and railways 
are being  cut; land  use is  changing;  and so forth.   Inasmuch  as these 
particular  changes directly  affect tax assessments, there are provisions 
for recording   them on the map  or in  a title  register. The accumulation 
of annotations  and marginalia   at some point  render  the map illegible, 
whereupon  a more up-to-date  but  still  static  map must  be drawn  and 
the process repeated. 
     No  operating  land-revenue   system can  stop  at the  mere  identifi- 
cation of parcel  and ownership.  Other  schematic facts, themselves sta- 
tic,  must be  created to  arrive  at  some judgment   of a  sustainable  tax 
burden. Land  may be graded by soil class, how well  it  is watered, what 
crops are grown  on  it, and  its presumed  average yield,  which  is often 
checked by sample crop-cuttings.  These facts are themselves changing, 
or they are averages that may mask great  variation.  Like the  still photo 
of the cadastral  map,  they grow  more  unrealistic  with   time and  must 
be reexamined. 
     These state simplifications,   like all  state simplifications,   are always 
far more  static  and schematic  than  the actual  social phenomena  they 
presume to  typify. The farmer   rarely  experiences an average  crop, an 
average rainfall,  or an average price for his crops. Much  of the long his- 
tory of rural   tax revolts  in early  modern  Europe and elsewhere  can be 
illuminated  by the lack  of fit between an unyielding  fiscal  claim, on one 
hand, and an often wildly  fluctuating  capacity of the rural  population  to 
meet that claim,  on the  other.87 And yet, even the most equitable, well- 
intentioned  cadastral  system cannot be uniformly  administered   except 
on the basis of stable units  of  measurement and  calculation.  It  can no 
more reflect   the actual  complexity   of a  farmer's  experience  than the 

64
                                                                                      Nature and Space 47 


scientific  forester's  schemes can reflect  the complexity   of the natural- 
ist's forest.88 
     Governed  by a practical,  concrete  objective, the  cadastral lens also 
ignored  anything  lying  outside  its sharply  defined  field  of vision.  This 
was reflected  in a loss of  detail  in the  survey itself.  Surveyors,  one re- 
cent Swedish  study found,  made the fields more  geometrically  regular 
than  they in  fact were.  Ignoring   small  jogs and  squiggles made  their 
job easier and  did not materially   affect the outcome.89 Just as the com- 
mercial   forester  found  it  convenient   to overlook   minor  forest  prod- 
ucts, so  the cadastral  official   tended  to ignore  all  but  the main  com- 
mercial  use of a field. The fact that  a field designated as growing  wheat 
or hay  might  also be a significant   source of bedding  straw,  gleanings, 
rabbits,  birds,  frogs, and mushrooms  was not so much  unknown  as ig- 
nored  lest  it needlessly  complicate   a straightforward    administrative 
formula.90 The most significant  instance  of myopia, of course,  was that 
the cadastral  map  and assessment system considered only  the dimen- 
sions of the land  and its value  as a productive  asset or as a commodity 
for  sale. Any value  that the  land might   have for  subsistence purposes 
or  for  the  local  ecology  was bracketed   as aesthetic,  ritual,   or senti- 
mental  values. 


Transformation and Resistance 

     The cadastral map is an instrument of control which both reflects and consol- 
     idates the power of those who commission it. . . . The cadastral map is parti- 
     san: where knowledge is power, it provides comprehensive information to be 
     used to the advantage of some and the detriment of others, as rulers and ruled 
     were well aware in the tax struggles of the 18th and 19th centuries. Finally, 
     the cadastral map is active: in portraying one reality, as in the settlement of 
     the new world or in India, it helps obliterate the old. 
     -Roger  J. P. Kain and Elizabeth Baigent, The Cadastral Map 

     The  shorthand   formulas  through   which  tax  officials   must  appre- 
hend  reality  are not mere  tools of observation.  By  a kind  of fiscal Hei- 
senberg  principle,   they  frequently   have  the power   to transform    the 
facts they  take note of. 
     The  door-and-window    tax established  in  France  under  the Direc- 
tory  and  abolished only  in  1917 is a striking   case in point.91 Its  origi- 
nator  must  have reasoned that the  number  of windows  and doors  in a 
dwelling   was proportional    to the  dwelling's   size. Thus a tax  assessor 
need not  enter the house or measure  it but merely  count the  doors and 
windows.  As a simple,  workable  formula,   it was  a brilliant   stroke, but 
it  was not without  consequences. Peasant dwellings were  subsequently 
designed  or renovated  with   the formula   in mind   so as to have as few 
openings  as possible. While the fiscal  losses could be recouped by rais- 

65
48  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


ing the tax per opening,  the long-term  effects on the  health of the rural 
population  lasted for  more than  a century. 
     The novel state-imposed  form  of  land tenure  was far  more  revolu- 
tionary  than a door-and-window   tax.  It  established a whole  new insti- 
tutional  nexus.  However  simple  and  uniform   the new  tenure  system 
was to  an administrator,    it flung  villagers   willy-nilly    into  a  world  of 
title deeds, land offices, fees, assessments, and applications. They faced 
powerful  new specialists  in the  form  of land clerks,  surveyors, judges, 
and lawyers whose  rules of  procedure  and decisions  were unfamiliar. 
     Where the  new tenure  system  was a colonial   imposition-that      is, 
where  it was  totally  unfamiliar,    where  it  was imposed  by  alien  con- 
querors using an unintelligible    language and institutional   context,  and 
where  local  practices  bore  no  resemblance  to  freehold  tenure-the 
consequences were far-reaching.   The permanent  settlement  in  India, 
for example,  created  a new class who,  because they paid  the taxes on 
the land, became full  owners with  rights  of inheritance   and sale where 
none had existed  earlier.92 At the same time, literally   millions   of culti- 
vators, tenants,  and  laborers  lost  their  customary  rights   of access to 
the land and  its products.  Those in the  colonies who  first plumbed  the 
mysteries of the new tenure  administration   enjoyed  unique opportuni- 
ties. Thus the Vietnamese secritaires  and  interpretes who  served as in- 
termediaries   between the  French  officials   in  the  Mekong  Delta  and 
their Vietnamese subjects were in  a position to  make great fortunes. By 
concentrating  on  the legal paperwork,   such as title  deeds, and the ap- 
propriate  fees, they occasionally became landlords   to whole villages  of 
cultivators  who  had imagined  they  had opened common  land  free for 
the taking.  The new intermediaries,   of  course, might  occasionally  use 
their  knowledge  to see their compatriots   safely through   the new legal 
thicket.  Whatever  their  conduct,  their  fluency  in a language of  tenure 
specifically  designed  to be legible  and transparent   to  administrators, 
coupled  with  the  illiteracy   of the  rural  population   to  whom  the  new 
tenure was indecipherable,  brought  about  a momentous shift  in power 
relations.93 What was simplifying   to an official  was  mystifying  to most 
cultivators. 
     Freehold  title  and standard  land measurement  were to  central tax- 
ation and the real-estate market  what  central  bank currency  was to the 
                               Bymarket~lace.~~the  same token, they threatened to destroy a great 
deal of  local  power   and  autonomy.  It  is  no wonder,   then,  that  they 
should have been so vigorously  resisted. In  the eighteenth-century  Eu- 
ropean context,  any general cadastral  survey  was by definition  a gam- 
bit  of centralization;    the local  clergy  and  nobility   were bound  to  see 
both their   own taxing  powers  and the  exemptions  they enjoyed  men- 
aced. Commoners  were  likely  to  see it as a  pretext  for  an additional 
local tax.  Jean-Baptiste Colbert,  the great  "centralizer"   of  absolutism, 
proposed to conduct  a national  cadastral  survey of France,  but he was 

66
                                                                                      Nature and Space 49 


thwarted  in  1679  by the combined   opposition  of  the aristocracy   and 
clergy.  After  the  Revolution   more  than   a century   later,  the  radical 
Franqois-Noel  Babeuf,  in his  "Projet  de cadastre perpetuel,"  dreamed 
of a perfectly  egalitarian   land reform  in  which  everyone would  get  an 
equal parcel.95 He too was thwarted. 
     We must keep in  mind not  only the  capacity of state simplifications 
to transform   the world   but  also the capacity  of  the society  to modify, 
subvert, block,  and even overturn the  categories imposed upon  it. Here 
it  is useful  to  distinguish   what  might   be called  facts  on paper   from 
facts on  the ground.   As Sally  Falk Moore  and  many others  have  em- 
phasized, the  land-office  records  may  serve as the basis  for taxation, 
but they  may have little  to  do with  the actual  rights  to the  land. Paper 
owners may not be the effective  owners.96 Russian peasants, as we saw, 
might  register  a "paper"  consolidation   while  continuing   to interstrip. 
Land  invasions,  squatting,  and  poaching,  if successful,  represent  the 
exercise  of  de  facto  property   rights   which  are   not  represented  on 
paper. Certain  land  taxes and tithes  have been evaded or defied to  the 
point  where  they  have become  dead  letter^.^' The  gulf between  land 
tenure  facts on paper  and  facts on the  ground  is probably  greatest  at 
moments of social  turmoil  and revolt.  But  even in more tranquil   times, 
there will   always be  a shadow land-tenure   system lurking  beside  and 
beneath the  official  account  in the  land-records  office. We must  never 
assume that local  practice  conforms  with  state theory. 
     All  centralizing   states recognized  the value  of a uniform,   compre- 
hensive  cadastral  map.  Carrying   out the  mapmaking,   however,  was 
another  matter. As a rule of thumb,  cadastral  mapping  was earlier  and 
more  comprehensive  where  a powerful  central  state  could impose  it- 
self on a relatively   weak civil  society. Where,  by contrast,  civil  society 
was well  organized   and the state  relatively  weak,  cadastral  mapping 
was late,  often  voluntary,  and  fragmentary.  Thus  Napoleonic   France 
was mapped  much  earlier   than  England,  where  the legal  profession 
managed  for  a  long  time  to  stymie  this  threat   to its  local,   income- 
earning   function.   It   followed   from   the  same logic   that  conquered 
colonies  ruled  by  fiat  would  often  be cadastrally   mapped  before  the 
metropolitan    nation  that  ordered  it.  Ireland  may  have been the first. 
After  Cromwell's   conquest,  as Ian Hacking   notes, "Ireland   was com- 
pletely surveyed for  land, buildings,  people, and cattle under  the direct- 
orship  of William   Petty, in order  to facilitate  the  rape of that  nation  by 
the English   in 1 679.'Ig8 
     Where  the colony was a thinly  populated  settler-colony,  as in North 
America  or  Australia,  the  obstacles to  a thorough,  uniform   cadastral 
grid  were minimal.   There it was a question less of mapping  preexisting 
patterns  of  land  use than  of surveying  parcels  of  land  that  would  be 
given  or sold to  new arrivals  from  Europe  and of  ignoring  indigenous 
peoples and their  common-property   regimes."  Thomas Jefferson,  with 

67
50  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 





















                                          [To view this image, refer to  
                                          the print version of this title.] 
                                           
                                           
                                           





















7. The survey landscape, Castleton, North Dakota 


an  eye  trained    by  Enlightenment      rationalism,      imagined    dividing     the 
United    States  west  of  the  Ohio   River   into   "hundredsv-squares         mea- 
suring    ten   miles    by  ten    miles-and        requiring      settlers    to  take   the 
parcels   of  land  as so  designated. 
      The geometrical    clarity   of  Jefferson's  proposal   was not  merely  an  aes- 
thetic   choice;   he  claimed    that   irregular    lots   facilitated    fraud.   To  rein- 
force   his  case, he  cited   the  experience   of  Massachusetts,    where   actual 
landholdings     were    10 percent    to   100 percent    greater   than   what   had 

68
                                                                                      Nature and Space 5 1 


been granted by  deed.loO Not only did the regularity   of the  grid  create 
legibility   for  the taxing  authority,   but  it  was a convenient   and cheap 
way to package land and market it in  homogeneous units. The grid facil- 
itated the  commoditization   of land  as much as the calculation  of  taxes 
and boundaries. Administratively,   it was also disarmingly   simple. Land 
could  be registered  and  titled  from  a  distance by  someone who  pos- 
sessed virtually no local  knowledge.lol Once it was in  place, the scheme 
had some of  the impersonal,  mechanical   logic  of the foresters'  tables. 
But in  practice,  land titling   in Jefferson's plan  (which  was modified  by 
Congress to provide for rectangular  lots and townships  that were thirty- 
six square miles) did  not always follow  the prescribed pattern. 
     The Torrens  system of land titling,   developed in  Australia  and New 
Zealand  in the  186Os, provided a lithographed,   presurveyed  grid  rep- 
resenting  allotments   that  were registered   to settlers  on  a first-come, 
first-served  basis. It  was the quickest  and most  economical  means yet 
devised to sell land,  and it  was later adopted  in many  British  colonies. 
The more  homogeneous  and  rigid   the  geometric  grid,   however,  the 
more  likely  it  was to run  afoul  of  the natural   features of  the noncon- 
forming  landscape.  The possibilities  for  surprises was nicely  captured 
in this  satirical  verse from  New  Zealand. 

                          Now the road through  Michael's section 
                              though it looked well  on the map 
                          For the use it was intended 
                              wasn't really worth  a rap 
                          And at night was not unlikely 
                              to occasion some mishap. 

                           It was nicely planned on paper 
                              and was ruled without  remorse 
                           Over cliffs, and spurs and gullies 
                              with a straight  and even course 
                          Which  precluded locomotion 
                              on part of man or horse.102 


The cadastral  survey was but  one technique  in  the growing  armory   of 
the utilitarian   modern  state.lo3 Where the premodern state was content 
with   a level of  intelligence  sufficient  to  allow  it  to keep  order, extract 
taxes, and raise armies, the modem state increasingly  aspired to "take in 
charge"  the physical and human resources of the nation  and make them 
more  productive.   These  more  positive  ends  of  statecraft  required   a 
much  greater  knowledge of  the society. And an inventory   of land, peo- 
ple,  incomes,   occupations,  resources,  and  deviance  was  the  logical 
place  to begin.  "The need for the increasingly   bureaucratic  state to or- 
ganize  itself and control  its resources  gave an impulse to the collection 

69
52  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


of vital  and other statistics;  to forestry  and rational   agriculture;  to sur- 
veying and exact cartography; and to public  hygiene and climatology."104 
     Although   the  purposes  of  the  state  were  broadening,    what  the 
state wanted  to know  was still  directly   related to  those purposes. The 
nineteenth-century   Prussian  state, for  example, was very  much inter- 
ested in  the ages and  sexes of immigrants    and emigrants   but  not in 
their  religions  or  races; what  mattered  to the state was  keeping track 
of possible draft  dodgers  and maintaining   a supply  of men of military 
age.'"  The state's increasing   concern  with  productivity,    health,  sani- 
tation,  education,   transportation,    mineral   resources,  grain   produc- 
tion,  and investment  was less an abandonment  of the  older objectives 
of statecraft   than  a broadening   and deepening   of what  those  objec- 
tives entailed  in  the modern  world. 

70
2       Cities,          People,          and 
         Language 


    And the Colleges of the Cartographers set up a Map of the Empire which had 
    the size of the Empire itself and coincided with it point by point. . . . Succeed- 
    ing generations understood that this Widespread Map was Useless, and not 
    without Impiety they abandoned it to the Inclemencies of the Sun and the 
    Winters. 
    -Suarez Miranda, Viajes de varones prudentes (1658) 







An aerial view of a town  built during  the Middle Ages or the oldest 
quarters (medina) of a Middle Eastern city that has not been greatly 
tampered with has a particular look. It is the look of disorder. Or, to 
put it more precisely, the town conforms to no overall abstract form. 
Streets, lanes, and passages intersect at varying angles with a density 
that resembles the intricate complexity of some organic processes. In 
the case of a medieval town, where defense needs required walls and 
perhaps moats, there may be traces  of inner  walls superseded by 
outer walls, much like the growth rings of a tree. A representation of 
Bruges in about 1500 illustrates the pattern (figure 8). What definition 
there is to the city is provided by the castle green, the marketplace, 
and the river and canals that were (until they silted up) the lifeblood 
of this textile-trading city. 
     The fact that the layout of the city, having developed without any 
overall design, lacks a consistent geometric logic does not mean that it 
was at all confusing to its inhabitants. One imagines that many of its 
cobbled streets were nothing more than surfaced footpaths traced by 
repeated use. For those who grew up in its various quarters, Bruges 
would have been perfectly familiar, perfectly legible. Its very alleys and 
lanes would have closely approximated the most common daily move- 
ments. For a stranger or trader arriving for the first time, however, the 
town was almost certainly confusing, simply because it lacked a repet- 
itive, abstract logic that would allow a newcomer to orient herself. The 
cityscape of Bruges in 1500 could be said to privilege local knowledge 
over outside knowledge, including that of external political  authori- 

71
54  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 











                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         










8. Bruges circa 1500, from a painting in the Town Hall, Bruges 

ties.'  It functioned   spatially  in much  the same way  a difficult   or unin- 
telligible   dialect   would  function    linguistically.   As  a  semipermeable 
membrane, it facilitated  communication  within  the city while  remaining 
stubbornly  unfamiliar    to  those who  had not  grown   up speaking  this 
special geographic  dialect. 
     Historically,  the relative  illegibility   to outsiders of some urban neigh- 
borhoods  (or  of  their   rural   analogues,  such  as  hills,  marshes,  and 
forests) has provided  a vital  margin  of  political  safety from  control  by 
outside elites. A simple way of determining  whether this  margin exists is 
to ask if an outsider  would  have needed a local guide (a native tracker) 
in order  to find her  way successfully. If the answer is yes, then the com- 
munity  or terrain  in  question enjoys at least a small  measure of insula- 
tion  from  outside intrusion.   Coupled  with  patterns  of local  solidarity, 
this  insulation  has proven  politically    valuable  in  such disparate  con- 
texts as eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century  urban riots  over bread 
prices in  Europe,  the Front  de  Liberation  Nationale's  tenacious  resis- 
tance to  the  French in  the  Casbah of Algier~,~and   the politics   of the 
bazaar that helped to bring  down the Shah of Iran.  Illegibility,   then, has 
been and remains a reliable  resource for  political  aut~nomy.~ 
     Stopping   short  of redesigning   cities in  order  to  make them  more 
legible (a subject  that we shall  soon explore),  state authorities  endeav- 

72
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 55 


ored to map complex,  old  cities in  a way that  would  facilitate  policing 
and control.   Most of  the major  cities  of France  were  thus the subject 
of careful  military   mapping   (reconnaissances militaires),   particularly 
after  the  Revolution.   When  urban  revolts   occurred,   the  authorities 
wanted to  be able to move  quickly  to the precise  locations  that would 
enable them to  contain or  suppress the rebellions  effe~tively.~ 
     States and city  planners  have striven,  as one might expect, to  over- 
come this spatial  unintelligibility    and  to make urban  geography trans- 
parently legible  from without.  Their  attitude toward  what they regarded 
as the higgledy-piggledy   profusion  of unplanned   cities was not  unlike 
the attitude of foresters to the natural  profusion  of the unplanned forest. 
The origin   of grids  or  geometrically   regular  settlements  may  lie  in a 
straightforward    military   logic.  A square,  ordered,  formulaic   military 
camp  on the  order  of  the  Roman  castra  has many  advantages.  Sol- 
diers can easily  learn the  techniques  of building  it;  the commander   of 
the troops  knows exactly  in which  disposition   his subalterns  and vari- 
ous troops lie;  and any Roman  messenger or officer  who arrives  at the 
camp will   know  where  to find  the officer   he seeks. On a more specu- 
lative  note, a far-flung,  polyglot  empire  may find  it symbolically   useful 
to have its camps  and towns  laid  out according  to  formula  as a stamp 
of its order  and authority.  Other things  being equal, the city  laid out ac- 
cording  to a simple, repetitive  logic  will  be easiest to administer  and to 
police. 
     Whatever  the  political   and  administrative   conveniences  of  a geo- 
metric  cityscape,  the  Enlightenment    fostered  a strong  aesthetic  that 
looked with   enthusiasm on  straight  lines and visible  order.  No one ex- 
pressed  the prejudice    more  clearly  than   Descartes:  "These  ancient 
cities  that were  once mere straggling  villages  and have become  in the 
course  of time  great  cities  are  commonly   quite poorly   laid  out com- 
pared to  those well-ordered towns that  an engineer lays out on a vacant 
plane as it suits  his fancy. And  although,  upon considering  one-by-one 
the buildings   in  the  former  class  of towns,  one  finds  as much  art  or 
more than  one finds  in the latter  class of towns,  still,  upon  seeing how 
the buildings   are arranged-here     a large one, there a small  one-and 
how  they make  the streets crooked and uneven,  one will   say that  it  is 
chance  more than   the will   of  some men  using  their  reason that   has 
arranged them thus.'"' 
      Descartes's vision conjures up  the urban equivalent  of  the scientific 
forest:  streets  laid   out  in  straight  lines   intersecting   at right   angles, 
buildings   of uniform   design  and  size, the whole  built   according  to  a 
single,  overarching  plan. 
     The elective  affinity  between a strong  state and a uniformly  laid  out 

73
56  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


city is obvious. Lewis Mumford,  the historian   of urban form,  locates the 
modern European  origin  of this  symbiosis in the open,  legible baroque 
style of the Italian  city-state.  He claims,  in terms  that Descartes would 
have found congenial,  "It was one of the  triumphs  of the baroque mind 
to organize   space, to make  it  continuous,   reduce  it  to  measure and 
order.'I6 More to the point, the baroque redesigning  of medieval cities- 
with  its  grand  edifices,  vistas,  squares,  and  attention  to  uniformity, 
proportion,   and  perspective-was      intended   to reflect   the  grandeur 
and awesome power of the prince.  Aesthetic  considerations  frequently 
won out over the existing social  structure  and the mundane functioning 
of the city.  "Long  before the  invention   of bulldozers,"  Mumford   adds, 
"the Italian  military   engineer  developed, through  his professional  spe- 
cialization  in  destruction,  a bulldozing   habit  of mind:  one that  sought 
to clear the  ground  of encumbrances,  so as to make a clear  beginning 
on its own  inflexible  mathematical  lines."' 
     The visual  power  of the baroque  city  was underwritten   by scrupu- 
lous attention   to  the military   security   of the  prince  from   internal   as 
well  as external  enemies.  Thus both  Alberti   and  Palladio  thought  of 
main thoroughfares   as military  roads (viae militaires).   Such roads had 
to be straight,   and, in  Palladio's  view,  "the ways  will  be more  conve- 
nient  if they  are made everywhere  equal:  that  is to say that  there will 
be no part in  them where armies may not easily rnar~h.''~ 
     There are, of  course, many cities  approximating   Descartes's model. 
For obvious  reasons, most  have been planned  from  the  ground  up as 
new, often utopian  ~ities.~Where  they  have not been built  by imperial 
decrees, they have been designed by  their  founding  fathers  to accom- 
modate more  repetitive  and uniform   squares for future  settlement.1ÂA  
bird's-eye view  of central  Chicago  in the  late nineteenth  century  (Wil- 
liam  Penn's Philadelphia  or New  Haven would  do equally  well)  serves 
as an example of the grid  city (figure  9). 
     From  an administrator's   vantage point,  the ground  plan of Chicago 
is nearly  utopian.  It offers  a quick  appreciation  of the  ensemble, since 
the entirety  is made up of straight  lines, right  angles, and  repetitions." 
Even the rivers  seem scarcely to  interrupt  the  city's relentless  symme- 
try.  For an  outsider-or      a policeman-finding       an address  is a  com- 
paratively  simple  matter; no  local guides  are required.  The knowledge 
of local  citizens  is not especially  privileged   vis-a-vis that  of outsiders. 
If,  as is the  case in  upper  Manhattan,   the cross  streets are  consecu- 
tively  numbered  and are intersected  by longer  avenues, also consecu- 
tively  numbered,  the  plan  acquires  even greater  Thetransparen~y.~~  
aboveground  order  of  a grid  city  facilitates  its  underground   order  in 
the layout of water  pipes, storm  drains, sewers, electric  cables, natural 

74
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 57 










                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         









9. Map of downtown Chicago, circa 1893 


gas lines, and subways-an    order  no less important  to the  administra- 
tors of  a city.  Delivering   mail,  collecting   taxes, conducting   a census, 
moving  supplies and people  in and  out of the  city, putting  down  a riot 
or insurrection,    digging  for  pipes  and sewer  lines, finding   a felon  or 
conscript  (providing   he is  at the address  given),  and planning   public 
transportation,   water   supply, and  trash  removal   are all  made  vastly 
simpler  by the logic  of the grid. 
     Three aspects of this geometric  order in  human settlement  bear em- 
phasis. The  first  is that  the  order  in  question  is  most evident,  not  at 
street level, but rather  from  above and from  outside. Like  a marcher  in 
a parade or like  a single riveter  in a long assembly line,  a pedestrian  in 
the middle  of  this  grid  cannot  instantly  perceive  the  larger  design  of 
the city.  The symmetry  is either  grasped  from  a representation-it       is 
in fact  what  one would  expect if  one gave a schoolchild   a ruler  and  a 
blank  piece of paper-or      from  the vantage  point  of a helicopter   hov- 
ering far  above the ground: in  short, a God's-eye view, or the view of an 
absolute  ruler.  This spatial  fact  is perhaps  inherent   in the  process of 
urban  or  architectural   planning   itself,  a process that  involves  minia- 
turization    and  scale models   upon  which   patron   and  planner   gaze 
down,  exactly  as if  they were  in  a helicopter.13 There  is, after  all,  no 
other way  of visually imagining  what  a large-scale construction  project 
will  look  like  when it  is completed  except by  a miniaturization    of this 

75
58  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


kind. It  follows,  I believe, that  such plans, which  have the scale of toys, 
are judged for  their  sculptural  properties   and visual  order, often  from 
a perspective that  no or very  few human  observers will  ever replicate. 
     The miniaturization   imaginatively  achieved by scale models of cities 
or landscapes was practically  achieved with  the airplane.  The mapping 
tradition  of the  bird's-eye view,  evident in  the map of  Chicago, was no 
longer  a mere  convention.   By  virtue  of  its  great  distance,  an aerial 
view resolved what  might  have seemed ground-level confusion  into  an 
apparently  vaster order  and symmetry.  It would  be hard to  exaggerate 
the importance  of the airplane  for modernist  thought  and planning.  By 
offering  a perspective that  flattened the  topography  as if it were  a can- 
vas, flight   encouraged  new  aspirations   to  "synoptic  vision,   rational 
control,  planning,  and spatial  order."14 
     A second point  about  an urban  order  easily legible  from  outside  is 
that the  grand  plan  of the ensemble  has no necessary  relationship   to 
the order  of life  as it is  experienced  by its residents.  Although  certain 
state services may be more easily provided  and distant  addresses more 
easily located, these apparent  advantages may be negated by such per- 
ceived disadvantages as the absence of a dense street life, the intrusion 
of hostile authorities,  the  loss of the spatial irregularities   that foster  co- 
ziness, gathering   places  for  informal   recreation,   and  neighborhood 
feeling. The formal  order  of a geometrically  regular  urban  space is just 
that: formal   order.  Its visual  regimentation   has a ceremonial  or  ideo- 
logical  quality, much  like  the order  of a parade or  a barracks. The fact 
that such  order works  for  municipal   and state  authorities  in  adminis- 
tering  the city  is no guarantee  that it  works  for citizens.  Provisionally, 
then, we must  remain  agnostic about the  relation  between formal  spa- 
tial  order and  social experience. 
     The  third   notable  aspect  of homogeneous,   geometrical,   uniform 
property  is its  convenience as a standardized  commodity   for the  mar- 
ket. Like  Jefferson's scheme for surveying  or  the Torrens system for ti- 
tling  open land,  the grid  creates regular   lots and blocks  that are  ideal 
for  buying  and  selling.  Precisely  because they  are abstract  units  de- 
tached from   any ecological  or  topographical   reality,  they  resemble a 
kind of  currency  which  is endlessly amenable to aggregation  and frag- 
mentation.  This feature  of the  grid plan  suits  equally the surveyor,  the 
planner,  and the real-estate  speculator. Bureaucratic   and  commercial 
logic, in this  instance, go hand in  hand. As Mumford  notes, "The beauty 
of this mechanical  pattern,  from  the commercial  standpoint,  should  be 
plain. This  plan offers the engineer  none of those special problems  that 
irregular  parcels and curved boundary  lines present. An office boy could 
figure out  the number  of square  feet involved  in a street  opening or  in 

76
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 59 


a sale of land:   even a lawyer's  clerk  could  write   a description   of  the 
necessary deed of sale, merely by filling  in with  the  proper  dimensions 
the standard document.  With  a T-square and a triangle, finally,  the mu- 
nicipal  engineer could, without  the slightest  training  as either an archi- 
tect or a sociologist,  'plan'  a metropolis,  with  its standard  lots, its stan- 
dard blocks,  its  standard  width  streets. .  . . The very absence of  more 
specific adaptation  to  landscape or  to human  purpose only  increased, 
by its very indefiniteness,  its general usefulness for exchange."1s 
     The vast  majority   of Old  World  cities  are, in  fact,  some historical 
amalgam  of a Bruges  and a Chicago.  Although   more than  one politi- 
cian, dictator,  and  city planner  have devised plans  for the total  recast- 
ing of  an existing  city, these dreams  came at such cost,  both financial 
and political,   that they  have rarely  left the drawing   boards. Piecemeal 
planning,  by contrast,  is far  more  common.  The central,  older  core of 
many  cities  remains  somewhat  like  Bruges,  whereas  the newer  out- 
skirts are more  likely  to exhibit  the marks of  one or more plans.  Some- 
times, as in the sharp contrast  between old  Delhi and the  imperial  cap- 
ital  of New Delhi,  the divergence  is formalized. 
     Occasionally,  authorities   have taken  draconian  steps to retrofit   an 
existing  city. The  redevelopment  of  Paris by  the prefect  of  the Seine, 
Baron Haussmann, under  Louis Napoleon was a grandiose public works 
program  stretching   from  1853 to 1869. Haussmann's  vast scheme ab- 
sorbed unprecedented  amounts  of public   debt, uprooted  tens of thou- 
sands of people, and could have been accomplished  only by a single ex- 
ecutive authority   not directly   accountable to  the electorate. 
     The logic  behind  the  reconstruction   of  Paris bears  a resemblance 
to the  logic  behind  the transformation    of old-growth   forests  into  sci- 
entific  forests  designed for  unitary  fiscal  management.  There was  the 
same emphasis on simplification,   legibility,  straight  lines, central  man- 
agement,  and a synoptic  grasp  of the  ensemble. As in  the  case of the 
forest,  much of the  plan was  achieved. One chief  difference,  however, 
was that  Haussmann's plan was devised less for  fiscal reasons than for 
its impact  on the  conduct and  sensibilities  of Parisians. While  the plan 
did  create a far  more  legible fiscal  space in the  capital,  this  was a by- 
product   of the  desire to  make the  city  more governable,   prosperous, 
healthy, and  architecturally   imposing.16 The second difference  was, of 
course, that  those uprooted  by the  urban  planning  of the  Second Em- 
pire  could, and did,  strike back. As we shall see, the retrofitting   of Paris 
foreshadows  many  of the  paradoxes of  authoritarian    high-modernist 
planning  that  we will  soon examine  in greater  detail. 
     The  plan  reproduced  in  figure  10 shows  the new  boulevards  con- 
structed  to Haussmann's measure as well as the prerevolutionary   inner 

77
60  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 













                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         












10. Map of Paris, 1870, showing the principal new streets built between 1850 
and 1870 

boulevards,  which  were widened   and straightened.17 But  the retrofit, 
seen merely as a new street map,  greatly  underestimates  the transfor- 
mation.  For  all  the demolition   and  construction   required,   for all  the 
new legibility    added to  the  street plan,   the new  pattern  bore  strong 
traces of an accommodation  with   "old-growth''   Paris. The outer boule- 
vards, for  example, follow  the line  of the older  customs (octroi)  wall  of 
1787.  But  Haussmann's scheme  was far  more  than  a  traffic  reform. 
The new legibility   of the boulevards was  accompanied by changes that 
revolutionized  daily  life: new aqueducts,  a much more effective sewage 
system, new rail  lines and terminals,   centralized  markets  (Les Halles), 
gas lines  and lighting,   and new  parks  and public   squares.18 The new 
Paris created by  Louis Napoleon  became, by the  turn  of the century,  a 
widely  admired   public  works  miracle   and shrine  for  would-be   plan- 
ners from  abroad. 
     At the  center of Louis  Napoleon's  and Haussmann's plans  for Paris 
lay the  military   security  of  the state.  The redesigned  city  was, above 

78
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 6 1 


all,  to  be made  safe  against  popular   insurrections.    As Haussmann 
wrote,  "The order  of this Queen-city  is one of the  main pre-conditions 
of general  [public]   security."19 Barricades  had gone  up nine  times  in 
the twenty-five years before  185 1. Louis Napoleon and Haussmann had 
seen the revolutions   of 1830  and 1848;  more recently,  the  June Days 
and resistance  to  Louis  Napoleon's  coup  represented  the  largest  in- 
surrection   of the  century.  Louis   Napoleon,  as a  returned  exile,  was 
well  aware of how  tenuous his  hold on  power might  prove. 
     The geography of insurrection,   however, was not  evenly distributed 
across Paris. Resistance was concentrated in  densely packed, working- 
class quartiers, which, like  Bruges, had complex, illegible  street plans.2o 
The 1860 annexation  of the  "inner  suburbs'' (located  between the  cus- 
toms  wall  and  the  outer  fortifications    and  containing   240,000  resi- 
dents) was explicitly   designed to gain  mastery over  a ceinture sauvage 
that  had thus  far  escaped police  control.   Haussmann  described  this 
area as a "dense belt of suburbs,  given over to twenty  different   admin- 
istrations,  built  at random,  covered by  an inextricable  network  of  nar- 
row and tortuous  public  ways, alleys, and dead-ends, where  a nomadic 
population  without  any real  ties to the land [property]   and without  any 
effective  surveillance,  grows  at a prodigious   speed."21 Within Paris it- 
self, there were  such revolutionary   foyers as the Marais and  especially 
the Faubourg  Saint-Antoine,  both  of which  had been determined   cen- 
ters of resistance  to Louis Napoleon's  coup d'ktat. 
     The military   control   of these insurrectionary    spaces-spaces    that 
had not yet been well  mapped-was     integral  to Haussmann's plan.22A  
series of new  avenues between the  inner  boulevards  and the customs 
wall  was  designed  to facilitate    movement  between  the  barracks   on 
the outskirts   of  the city  and  the subversive  districts.   As Haussmann 
saw it,  his new roads would  ensure multiple,   direct  rail  and road links 
between each district   of the city  and the  military  units  responsible  for 
order  there.13 Thus, for example, new boulevards in northeastern  Paris 
allowed  troops  to  rush  from  the  Courbevoie barracks   to the  Bastille 
and then  to  subdue the turbulent    Faubourg Saint-Antoine.14  Many  of 
the new rail  lines and stations  were located with  similar  strategic  goals 
in  mind.  Where  possible, insurrectionary    quartiers   were demolished 
or broken   up by new  roads,  public  spaces, and commercial   develop- 
ment.  Explaining   the need for  a loan of 50  million  francs  to begin  the 
work,  Lkon  Faucher emphasized state security  needs: "The interests of 
public  order, no  less than those of salubrity, demand  that a wide  swath 
be cut as soon as possible across this  district  of  barricade^."^^ 
     The reconstruction   of Paris was also a necessary public-health  mea- 

79
62  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


sure. And  here  the  steps that  the  hygienists  said  would   make Paris 
more healthful  would  at the same time  make it more  efficient  econom- 
ically and  more secure militarily.   Antiquated  sewers and cesspools, the 
droppings  of an estimated  thirty-seven  thousand horses (in  1850), and 
the unreliable   water  supply  made Paris  literally   pestilential.  The  city 
had the highest  death rate in  France and was most susceptible  to viru- 
lent epidemics  of cholera; in  183 1, the disease killed 18,400 people, in- 
cluding  the prime  minister.  And  it was in  those districts  of revolution- 
ary resistance  where, because of  crowding  and  lack of sanitation,   the 
rates of mortality  were highest.26 Haussmann's Paris was, for those who 
were not  expelled,  a  far  healthier  city;  the  greater  circulation    of air 
and water  and the  exposure to sunlight   reduced the risk  of  epidemics 
just as the improved  circulation   of goods and  labor (healthier  labor,  at 
that)  contributed  to  the city's  economic  well-being.  A utilitarian    logic 
of labor  productivity   and commercial   success went hand in hand  with 
strategic  and public-health   concerns. 
     The politico-aesthetic    tastes of the  driving  force  behind  the trans- 
formation   of Paris, Louis  Napoleon  himself,  were also decisive. When 
Haussmann was appointed prefect of the Seine, Louis Napoleon handed 
him  a map that  provided  for  the central  market,  the Bois  de Bologne, 
and many  of the streets  eventually  built.  There  is no doubt  that  Louis 
Napoleon's plans drew  heavily  from the ideas of the  Saint Simonists  in 
their  visionary  journal   Le globe and from  the model  urban  communi- 
ties sketched by Fourier  and Cabet.17 Their grandiose designs appealed 
to his own  determination   to  have the new grandeur  of  the capital  city 
serve as testimony to  the grandeur  of the regime. 
     As happens in many  authoritarian   modernizing  schemes, the politi- 
cal tastes of  the ruler  occasionaIly  trumped   purely  military   and hnc- 
tional concerns. Rectilinear  streets may have admirably assisted the mo- 
bilization  of troops  against insurgents,  but they  were also to be flanked 
by elegant  facades and to terminate   in imposing  buildings   that would 
impress visitors.28 Uniform modern  buildings  along the new boulevards 
may have represented healthier  dwellings,  but they were ofien  no more 
than facades. The zoning regulations were almost exclusively concerned 
with  the visible  surfaces of buildings,   but behind  the facades, builders 
could build  crowded,  airless tenements, and many of them  did.lg 
     The new Paris,  as T. J. Clark has observed, was intensely visualized: 
"Part  of Haussmann's  purpose was to  give modernity   a shape, and he 
seemed at the time to  have a measure of success in doing so; he built  a 
set of forms  in which  the  city  appeared to be visible,  even intelligible: 
Paris, to repeat  the formula,  was becoming  a ~pectacle."~~ 
     Legibility,   in  this case, was achieved  by a much  more pronounced 

80
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 63 


segregation of the  population  by class and  function.  Each fragment  of 
Paris increasingly  took on a distinctive   character  of dress, activity, and 
wealth-bourgeois      shopping  district,  prosperous   residential  quarter, 
industrial   suburb,  artisan  quarter,   bohemian  quarter.  It  was  a more 
easily managed  and administered   city and  a more  "readable"  city  be- 
cause of Haussmann's heroic  simplifications. 
     As in most ambitious  schemes of modern  order,  there was a kind  of 
evil twin  to  Haussmann's spacious  and imposing   new capital.  The hi- 
erarchy  of urban  space in  which  the  rebuilt  center  of  Paris occupied 
pride  of  place  presupposed  the  displacement   of the  urban   poor  to- 
ward the  ~eriphery.~' Nowhere  was this  more true  than in Belleville,   a 
popular   working-class   quarter   to  the  northeast   which   grew  into  a 
town  of sixty thousand  people by  1856. Many of its residents  had been 
disinherited  by  Haussmann's demolitions;  some called  it a community 
of  outcasts.  By  the                 it1860~~ had become a suburban equivalent of 
what  the Faubourg  Saint-Antoine   had  been earlier-an      illegible,   in- 
surrectionary   foyer.  "The  problem  was  not  that  Belleville   was not  a 
community,  but  that it  became the sort of  community  which  the  bour- 
geoisie feared,  which   the police  could  not  penetrate,  which  the  gov- 
ernment  could  not  regulate, where  the  popular  classes, with  all  their 
unruly  passions  and political   resentments,  held the  upper  hand."32 If, 
as many claim,   the Commune  of Paris  in  187 1 was partly an  attempt 
to reconquer  the city  ("la reconquete  de la Ville par  la Ville")33by  those 
exiled  to  the periphery   by  Haussmann,  then  Belleville   was  the geo- 
graphical  locus  of that  sentiment.  The Communards,  militarily    on the 
defensive in  late May  187 1, retreated toward  the  northeast and  Belle- 
ville,  where,   at the  Belleville   town  hall,   they  made their   last  stand. 
Treated as a den of  revolutionaries,   Belleville   was subjected  to a bru- 
tal  military   occupation. 
     Two  diagnostic  ironies   marked  the suppression  of  the Commune. 
The first  was that  the strategic  design of Haussmann  was triumphant. 
The  boulevards   and  rail   lines  that  the   Second  Empire   had  hoped 
would  foil  a popular   insurrection   had  proved their   value.  "Thanks to 
Haussmann,  the Versailles army could  move in one fell  swoop from the 
Place du Chateau d'eau  to                             TheBelle~ille."~~ second irony was that, just 
as the Faubourg  Saint-Antoine  had been effaced by Haussmann's dem- 
olitions,  so too was much  of the newly offending  quarter  obliterated  by 
the building   of the  Eglise Sacre  Coeur, built  "in  the guilty  town  . . . as 
restitution   made on the  site of the crime."35 

81
64  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


The Creation   of Surnames 

Some of the categories  that  we most take  for granted  and  with  which 
we now routinely   apprehend  the social world   had their  origin  in  state 
projects of standardization   and legibility.  Consider, for  example, some- 
thing  as fundamental  as permanent surnames. 
     A  vignette  from   the  popular   film   Witness illustrates    how,  when 
among strangers,  we  do rely  on surnames  as key navigational   aids.36 
The detective in the film  is attempting  to locate a young Amish boy who 
may have witnessed a murder. Although  the detective  has a surname to 
go on,  he is thwarted   by several  aspects of Amish  traditionalism,    in- 
cluding  the antique  German  dialect  spoken by the Amish.  His  first  in- 
stinct  is, of  course, to  reach for  the telephone  book-a     list  of  proper 
names and addresses-but    the  Amish don't  have telephones.  Further- 
more,  he learns,  the Amish  have a very  small  number  of  last  names. 
His quandary  reminds  us that the  great variety  of surnames  and given 
names in the United  States allows us to identify  unambiguously  a large 
number  of individuals  whom  we may never have met.  A world  without 
such names is bewildering;  indeed, the detective  finds Amish society so 
opaque that  he needs a native tracker  to find  his way. 
     Customary   naming  practices   throughout   much  of  the  world   are 
enormously  rich. Among some peoples, it is not  uncommon  for individ- 
uals  to have  different   names during   different   stages of  life  (infancy, 
childhood,  adulthood)  and in some cases after death; added to these are 
names used for  joking,  rituals,  and  mourning   and names used for  in- 
teractions  with  same-sex friends or with  in-laws.  Each name is specific 
to a certain   phase of life,  social setting,  or  interlocutor.   A single  indi- 
vidual  will  frequently  be called  by several different   names, depending 
on the stage of  life and the  person addressing  him  or her. To the ques- 
tion  "What  is your  name?" which  has a more  unambiguous  answer in 
the contemporary  West, the only plausible  answer  is "It  depends."37 
     For  the insider   who grows  up  using  these naming  practices,  they 
are both  legible  and clarifying.   Each name  and the  contexts of its  use 
convey  important    social  knowledge.   Like   the  network   of  alleys  in 
Bruges,  the assortment  of  local weights   and measures, and  the intri- 
cacies of  customary  land  tenure, the  complexity   of naming  has some 
direct  and often quite  practical  relations  to local  purposes. For  an out- 
sider, however, this  byzantine  complexity  of names is a formidable  ob- 
stacle to  understanding  local  society. Finding  someone, let  alone situ- 
ating  him  or  her  in  a kinship   network   or tracing   the  inheritance   of 
property,  becomes a major undertaking.   If, in  addition,  the population 
in question  has reason to conceal its  identity  and its  activities  from ex- 

82
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 65 


ternal  authority,   the  camouflage   value  of  such naming   practices   is 
considerable. 
     The invention  of permanent,  inherited  patronyms  was, after  the ad- 
ministrative  simplification   of nature  (for example, the forest)  and space 
(for  example, land  tenure),  the  last step in  establishing  the necessary 
preconditions   of modern  statecraft.  In almost  every case it was a state 
project,  designed to allow  officials  to  identify, unambiguously,  the  ma- 
jority  of its citizens. When  successful, it went far to  create a legible peo- 
         Tax and tithe rolls,  property rolls,  conscription  lists, censuses, and 
property   deeds recognized  in  law  were  inconceivable   without   some 
means of fixing  an individual's   identity  and linking   him  or her to  a kin 
group. Campaigns  to assign permanent patronyms  have typically  taken 
place, as one might expect, in  the context of a state's exertions to put its 
fiscal  system on a sounder  and  more  lucrative  footing.   Fearing,  with 
good reason, that  an effort  to enumerate  and register  them  could be a 
prelude  to some new tax burden  or conscription,  local  officials  and the 
population   at large often  resisted such campaigns. 
     If  permanent   surnames were  largely  a project  of official   legibility, 
then  they should  have  appeared  earliest  in  those societies  with   pre- 
cocious  states.  China  provides  a striking   example.39 By  roughly  the 
fourth  century  B.C. (although the exact timing   and comprehensiveness 
are in  dispute),  the  Qin dynasty  had apparently   begun imposing   sur- 
names on  much  of its population   and  enumerating  them  for  the pur- 
poses of taxes, forced labor, and Thiscons~ription.~~  initiative  may well 
have been the  origin  of the  term  "laobaixing,"  meaning,  literally,   "the 
old one hundred  surnames," which  in modern  China has come to mean 
"the  common   people."  Before  this,  the  fabled  Chinese  patrilineage, 
while  established  among  ruling  houses and  related  lines,  was absent 
among commoners.  They did not  have surnames, nor did they  even im- 
itate  elite practices  in this respect.  The assigning of patronyms  by fam- 
ily  was integral   to  state policy  promoting   the  status of  (male)  family 
heads, giving  them legal jurisdiction   over their  wives, children,   and ju- 
niors  and,  not  incidentally,    holding  them   accountable  for  the  fiscal 
obligations  of the  entire family.41 This (Qin) policy  required  registering 
the entire  population,   after which   the "hodgepodge of  terms by which 
people were  called were  all classified  as hsing [surname],  to be passed 
down  to their   patrilineal   descendants                               Onindefinitel~."~~ this account, 
both the  establishment of permanent  patronyms  and the creation of the 
patrilineal   family  itself  can be attributed  to early state simplification. 
      Until  at  least  the fourteenth   century,  the  great  majority   of  Euro- 
peans  did  not  have permanent    patronymic^.^^ An  individual's   name 
was typically   his given name, which  might  well  suffice for  local identi- 

83
66  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


fication.  If something  more were  required,  a second designation could 
be added, indicating  his occupation  (in the English  case, smith, baker), 
his geographical  location  (hill,  edgewood),  his father's  given name, or 
a personal characteristic  (short,  strong). These secondary designations 
were not permanent   surnames; they did  not  survive their  bearers, un- 
less by chance,  say, a baker's  son went  into  the  same trade  and was 
called by the same second designation. 
     We can   learn  something   about  the   creation   of  permanent   pat- 
ronyms  in  Europe  by the  documentation   left  behind  from   the failed 
census (catasto) of the Florentine state in 1427.44 The catasto was an au- 
dacious attempt to rationalize   the state's revenues and military strength 
by specifying  its  subjects and  their  wealth,  residences,  landholdings, 
and ages.45 Close study of these records demonstrates, first,  that, as in 
the Chinese  case, state  initiative   created  new  surnames  rather  than 
simply recording  existing  surnames. It  is thus often impossible to know 
whether  a state-recorded surname  has any social existence outside the 
role of the text  in which  it is inscribed.  Second, the variable  imposition 
of  permanent  surnames  within    a territory-in        this  case Tuscany- 
serves as a rough-and-ready gauge of  state capacity. 
     Family  names in early  fifteenth-century  Tuscany were  confined to a 
very few powerful,  property-owning    lineages (such as the Strozzi).  For 
such lineages, a surname  was a way of achieving  social recognition   as 
a "corporate  group,"  and kin and  affines adopted the  name as a way of 
claiming  the backing  of an influential  lineage.  Beyond this narrow  seg- 
ment of  society and a small  urban  patriciate   that copied  its practices, 
there were  no permanent  family  names. 
     How,  in this  case, was the catasto office to pinpoint   and register  an 
individual,   let alone his location,  his property,  and his age? When mak- 
ing  his declaration,   a typical  Tuscan provided  not  only  his own  given 
name but  those  of his father   and perhaps  his  grandfather  as well,  in 
quasi-biblical   fashion (Luigi,  son of  Giovanni,  son of Paolo). Given the 
limited  number  of baptismal  names and the tendency  of many families 
to repeat names in  alternate generations,  even this sequence might  not 
suffice for  unambiguous  identification.   The subject might  then  add his 
profession,  his nickname,  or  a personal characteristic.   There is no  ev- 
idence that  any  of these designations  was a permanent   patronym,  al- 
though  this exercise and  others like  it might  have eventually  served to 
crystallize   surnames, at  least for  documentary   purposes.  In the  final 
analysis, the Florentine   state was inadequate to the administrative   feat 
intended   by the  catasto.   Popular  resistance,   the  noncompliance   of 
many local  elites, and  the arduousness and cost  of the census exercise 
doomed the  project,  and officials  returned  to  the earlier  fiscal system. 

84
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 67 


     What evidence we  have suggests that second names of any kind be- 
came rarer as distance from  the state's fiscal reach increased.  Whereas 
one-third  of  the households  in Florence  declared  a second  name, the 
proportion   dropped  to one-fifth  for  secondary towns  and to one-tenth 
in the countryside.  It  was not until  the  seventeenth century that  family 
names crystallized  in the  most remote  and poorest areas of Tuscany- 
the areas that would  have had the  least contact with   officialdom. 
     A comparable  connection  between state building   and the invention 
of permanent   patronyms  exists  for  fourteenth-   and fifteenth-century 
England.  As in Tuscany, in England  only  wealthy  aristocratic   families 
tended to have fixed surnames. In the English  case such names referred 
typically  to  families'  places of origin   in Normandy   (for example,  Bau- 
mont,  Percy, Disney) or  to the places  in England  that  they held  in  fief 
from  William  the  Conqueror  (for example,  Gerard  de Sussex). For the 
rest of the male population,  the  standard practice  of linking  only  father 
and son by way of  identification  pre~ailed.~~Thus,  William  Robertson's 
male son  might  be called  Thomas Williamson   (son of William),   while 
Thomas's son, in turn, might be called Henry  Thompson (Thomas's son). 
Note that the  grandson's name, by itself, bore no evidence of  his grand- 
father's  identity,   complicating   the  tracing  of  descent through   names 
alone. A great many northern  European  surnames, though  now perma- 
nent, still  bear, like  a fly caught  in  amber, particles  that  echo their  an- 
tique purpose  of designating  who  a man's father was ( Fitz-,  0'-,   -sen, 
-son, -s,  Mac-,                     At-~ich).~' the time of their establishment, last names 
often had a kind  of local  logic to them:  John who  owned a mill  became 
John Miller;   John  who  made cart  wheels became  John Wheelwright; 
John who  was physically   small became John  Short.  As their  male de- 
scendants, whatever  their   occupations  or  stature, retained  the  patro- 
nyms, the names  later assumed an arbitrary   cast. 
     The development  of  the personal  surname  (literally,  a name added 
to another  name, and  not to be confused  with  a permanent  patronym) 
went hand  in hand with  the development  of written,  official  documents 
such  as tithe  records,   manorial   dues rolls,   marriage   registers,  cen- 
suses, tax records, and  land records.48 They were necessary to the suc- 
cessful conduct  of any administrative  exercise involving  large  numbers 
of  people  who  had  to  be  individually    identified   and  who  were  not 
known  personally  by the authorities.  Imagine  the dilemma  of a tithe  or 
capitation-tax    collector  faced  with  a  male population,    90 percent  of 
whom  bore just  six Christian   names (John,  William,  Thomas,  Robert, 
Richard,   and Henry).  Some second designation  was absolutely  essen- 
tial  for  the records,  and, if the  subject suggested none, it was  invented 
for  him by the recording   clerk. These second designations and the rolls 

85
68  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


of names  that they  generated  were to  the legibility    of the population 
what uniform   measurement  and the cadastral  map were to the  legibil- 
ity of real  property.  While the  subject might  normally   prefer the  safety 
of anonymity,  once he was  forced to  pay the tax,  it was then  in his  in- 
terest to be accurately  identified   in order  to avoid paying  the same tax 
twice.  Many of  these fourteenth-century   surnames  were clearly  noth- 
ing more  than  administrative   fictions   designed to  make a population 
fiscally  legible.  Many of  the subjects whose  "surnames"  appear in  the 
documents  were  probably  unaware  of  what  had been  written   down, 
and, for the  great majority,  the surnames had no social  existence what- 
ever outside the document.49 Only on very  rare occasions  does one en- 
counter  an entry, such  as "William  Carter,  tailor,"  that implies  that  we 
may be dealing  with  a permanent  patronym. 
     The increasing   intensity  of interaction   with   the state and  statelike 
structures   (large   manors,  the   church)   exactly  parallels   the   devel- 
opment  of  permanent,   heritable   patronyms.   Thus,  when  Edward   I 
clarified   the  system of  landholding,   establishing   primogeniture    and 
hereditary  copyhold  tenure  for manorial   land, he provided  a powerful 
incentive  for  the  adoption  of  permanent  patronyms.   Taking one's fa- 
ther's surname became, for  the eldest son at least, part of a claim  to the 
property  on  the father's  death.50 Now that  property  claims  were  sub- 
ject  to state  validation,   surnames  that  had  once been  mere  bureau- 
cratic  fantasies took on a social  reality  of their own.  One imagines that 
for  a long time  English  subjects  had in  effect two  names-their     local 
name and an "official,"  fixed  patronym.  As the frequency  of interaction 
with  impersonal  administrative   structures  increased, the official  name 
came to prevail  in  all but a man's intimate   circle.  Those subjects living 
at a greater distance, both  socially and geographically,  from  the organs 
of  state power,  as  did  the  Tuscans, acquired   permanent  patronyms 
much later.  The upper classes and those living  in  the south of England 
thus acquired  permanent  surnames before  the lower  classes and those 
living  in  the  north   did.  The Scottish  and  Welsh acquired   them  even 
later.51 
     State  naming  practices,  like  state  mapping  practices,  were  inevi- 
tably  associated  with  taxes  (labor,  military    service, grain,   revenue,) 
and hence aroused  popular  resistance.  The great English  peasant  ris- 
ing of  138 1 (often called the Wat Tyler Rebellion) is attributed  to an un- 
precedented  decade of  registrations   and  assessments of poll  taxes.52 
For English  as well  as for Tuscan peasants, a census of all adult  males 
could not  but appear  ominous,  if not  ruinous. 
     The imposition   of permanent  surnames on  colonial  populations  of- 
fers us a chance to observe a process, telescoped into  a decade or less, 

86
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 69 


that  in the  West might   have taken  several  generations.  Many   of the 
same state objectives animate  both  the European  and the colonial   ex- 
ercises, but in  the colonial   case, the state is  at once more  bureaucra- 
tized and  less tolerant  of popular  resistance.  The very brusqueness  of 
colonial  naming   casts the purposes  and  paradoxes of  the process  in 
sharp relief. 
     Nowhere  is this better  illustrated   than in  the Philippines  under  the 
Spani~h.~~Filipinos   were instructed   by  the  decree of  November  2 1, 
1849, to take on  permanent  Hispanic  surnames. The author  of  the de- 
cree was Governor   (and Lieutenant   General) Narciso   Claveria  y Zal- 
dua, a meticulous  administrator   as determined to rationalize   names as 
he had been determined  to rationalize   existing  law, provincial   bound- 
aries, and  the calendar.54 He had  observed, as his  decree states, that 
Filipinos  generally  lacked  individual   surnames,  which  might   "distin- 
guish them  by families,"  and that  their  practice  of adopting  baptismal 
names drawn   from  a small  group  of  saints'  names resulted   in  great 
"confusion."  The remedy  was the catalogo,  a compendium  not  only  of 
personal  names but  also  of  nouns and  adjectives  drawn   from  flora, 
fauna, minerals,  geography, and the arts and intended  to be used by the 
authorities   in  assigning  permanent,  inherited    surnames.  Each  local 
official  was to be given a supply  of surnames sufficient  for  his jurisdic- 
tion,  "taking   care that  the  distribution   be  made by  letters  [of  the al- 
phabet]."55 In practice,  each town  was  given a number  of  pages from 
the alphabetized  catalogo,  producing  whole  towns  with  surnames be- 
ginning  with  the  same letter. In  situations  where  there  has been little 
in-migration   in the past  150 years, the traces of this  administrative   ex- 
ercise are still  perfectly  visible  across the landscape:  "For  example, in 
the Bikol  region,  the entire  alphabet  is laid out  like  a garland  over the 
provinces   of Albay,  Sorsogon,  and  Catanduanes  which   in   1849 be- 
longed  to  the  single  jurisdiction    of  Albay.  Beginning   with  A  at  the 
provincial   capital,  the letters  B and C mark  the towns  along  the coast 
beyond Tabaco to Tiwi.  We return   and trace along  the coast  of Sorso- 
gon the  letters E  to L;  then  starting  down  the Iraya   Valley at  Daraga 
with  M, we  stop with  S to Polangui and  Libon,  and finish  the alphabet 
with  a quick  tour around  the island  of Catanduane~."~~ 
     The confusion  for  which  the decree is the antidote  is largely  that  of 
the administrator    and the tax collector.  Universal  last  names, they be- 
lieve,  will  facilitate   the administration    of justice,   finance,  and public 
order  as well  as make it simpler  for  prospective  marriage   partners  to 
calculate  their  degree of                                   Forcon~anguinity.~~a  utilitarian state builder 
of  Claveria's temper,  however,  the ultimate   goal  was a complete   and 
legible  list of subjects and  taxpayers. This is abundantly  clear  from  the 

87
70  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


short preamble   to the decree:  "In  view  of the extreme  usefulness and 
practicality   of this  measure, the time  has come to issue a directive  for 
the formation   of  a civil  register  [formerly   a clerical   function],   which 
may not  only fulfill   and ensure the  said objectives,  but may  also serve 
as a basis for  the statistics  of the  country,  guarantee  the collection  of 
taxes, the regular  performance  of personal  services, and the receipt  of 
payment for  exemptions.  It  likewise  provides exact  information   of the 
movement  of the population,   thus  avoiding  unauthorized  migrations, 
hiding  taxpayers, and  other abuses."58 
     Drawing   on  the  accurate  lists  of  citizens  throughout   the  colony, 
Claveria  envisioned   each local  official   constructing    a table  of  eight 
columns  specifying  tribute   obligations,   communal  labor  obligations, 
first  name, surname,  age, marital  status, occupation,  and  exemptions. 
A ninth  column,  for  updating  the register,  would  record  alterations  in 
status and would  be submitted  for inspection  every  month. Because of 
their  accuracy and  uniformity,  these registers  would  allow  the state to 
compile  the precise  statistics  in Manila   that would   make for fiscal  ef- 
ficiency. The daunting  cost of assigning  surnames to the entire  popula- 
tion  and building   a complete and  discriminating   list  of taxpayers  was 
justified  by  forecasting   that  the  list,  while  it  might   cost as  much  as 
twenty thousand  pesos to create, would yield  one hundred thousand  or 
two hundred  thousand  pesos in continuing   annual  revenue. 
     What  if  the  Filipinos   chose to  ignore  their  new  last  names? This 
possibility   had already  crossed  Claveria's mind,   and he took  steps to 
make sure that the  names would stick.  Schoolteachers were ordered  to 
forbid  their  students to address or even know one another by any name 
except the officially  inscribed  family  name. Those teachers who did  not 
apply the  rule  with  enthusiasm were  to be punished.  More efficacious 
perhaps, given  the minuscule  school  enrollment,  was  the proviso  that 
forbade priests  and military   and civil  officials  from  accepting any  doc- 
ument,  application,   petition,   or deed that  did  not use the official   sur- 
names. All  documents using  other names would  be null  and void. 
     Actual   practice,   as one  might   expect,  fell  considerably   short  of 
Claveria's  administrative   utopia  of  legible and  regimented  taxpayers. 
The continued   existence  of such  non-Spanish   surnames  as Magsay- 
say or Macapagal  suggests that part  of the population   was never mus- 
tered for  this exercise.  Local officials  submitted  incomplete   returns or 
none at all.  And there  was another  serious problem,  one that  Claveria 
had foreseen  but inadequately   provided  for.  The new registers  rarely 
recorded,  as they  were supposed  to, the  previous  names used by  the 
registrants.   This meant  that  it became  exceptionally  difficult   for  offi- 
cials  to  trace  back property   and  taxpaying   to the  period  before  the 

88
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 7 1 


transformation   of names. The state had  in effect blinded  its  own hind- 
sight by the very  success of its new scheme. 
     With  surnames, as with  forests,  land  tenure,  and legible  cities,  ac- 
tual practice  never  achieved anything   like the  simplified  and  uniform 
perfection  to  which  its  designers had  aspired.  As late as  1872, an at- 
tempt at taking  a census proved a complete  fiasco, and it  was not tried 
again  until  just  before   the revolution    of  1896. Nevertheless,   by the 
twentieth  century, the vast majority  of  Filipinos  bore the surnames that 
Claveria had  dreamed up  for them.  The increasing  weight  of the  state 
in people's  lives  and the  state's capacity  to  insist  on  its rules  and  its 
terms ensured that. 
     Universal   last  names are  a  fairly   recent  historical   phenomenon. 
Tracking  property  ownership  and  inheritance,   collecting  taxes, main- 
taining  court  records,  performing   police  work,  conscripting   soldiers, 
and controlling   epidemics  were  all  made immeasurably   easier by the 
clarity  of full  names and, increasingly,  fixed  addresses. While the utili- 
tarian  state was committed   to a complete  inventory   of its population, 
liberal  ideas of citizenship,   which  implied  voting  rights  and  conscrip- 
tion,  also contributed   greatly  to  the standardization    of naming  prac- 
tices. The legislative  imposition  of permanent  surnames  is particularly 
clear in the case of Western European Jews who had no tradition   of last 
names. A Napoleonic decree "concernant  les Juifs qui  n'ont pas de nom 
de famille  et  de prenoms fixes,"  in  1808, mandated  last names.59 Aus- 
trian  legislation  of  1787, as part of the emancipation  process, required 
Jews to choose last  names or, if they  refused, to  have fixed last  names 
chosen for  them. In  Prussia the  emancipation  of  the Jews was contin- 
gent upon  the adoption  of  surnames.60 Many of the immigrants   to the 
United  States, Jews and non-Jews  alike,  had no permanent   surnames 
when  they set sail.  Very few, however,  made it  through   the initial   pa- 
perwork  without  an official  last name that  their  descendants carry still. 
     The process  of creating  fixed  last names  continues  in  much of  the 
Third   World  and  on  the  "tribal   frontiers"   of  more  developed  coun- 
tries.61 Today, of course, there are now many other state-impelled  stan- 
dard designations  that have vastly  improved  the capacity of the state to 
identify   an  individual.   The  creation   of  birth   and  death  certificates, 
more  specific  addresses  (that  is,  more  specific  than   something  like 
"John-on-the-hill"),    identity  cards, passports,  social security  numbers, 
photographs,  fingerprints,   and, most recently,  DNA profiles have super- 
seded the rather  crude  instrument  of the permanent   surname. But  the 
surname was a first  and crucial  step toward  making  individual  citizens 
officially   legible, and  along with  the photograph,   it is  still the  first fact 
on documents  of identity. 

89
72  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


The Directive   for  a Standard,   Official   Language 

The great cultural   barrier  imposed  by a separate  language is perhaps 
the most effective guarantee  that a social world,  easily  accessible to in- 
siders, will  remain  opaque  to outsiders.62 Just as the stranger  or state 
official   might  need  a local   guide  to find   his way  around   sixteenth- 
century  Bruges,  he would  need a local  interpreter   in  order  to under- 
stand and  be understood   in  an unfamiliar    linguistic   environment.   A 
distinct  language, however,  is a far more  powerful  basis for  autonomy 
than a complex  residential  pattern.  It  is also the bearer of a distinctive 
history, a cultural  sensibility,  a literature,  a mythology, a musical past.63 
In this  respect, a unique  language represents  a formidable  obstacle  to 
state knowledge, let alone colonization,   control,  manipulation,  instruc- 
tion, or  propaganda. 
     Of all  state simplifications,   then,  the imposition   of a single, official 
language may be the most powerful,  and  it is the precondition   of many 
other  simplifications.     This  process  should  probably    be viewed,   as 
Eugen Weber suggests in  the case of France, as one  of domestic  colo- 
nization  in which  various  foreign  provinces  (such as Brittany   and Oc- 
citanie)  are linguistically   subdued and culturally                                 Inin~orporated.~~ the 
first  efforts  made  to  insist  on  the use  of  French,  it  is  clear  that  the 
state's objective  was the  legibility   of  local  practice.  Officials   insisted 
that every legal  document-whether      a will,  document  of sale, loan in- 
strument,  contract, annuity,  or property  deed-be    drawn up  in French. 
As long as these documents  remained  in  local vernaculars,   they were 
daunting   to  an official    sent from   Paris  and  virtually    impossible  to 
bring  into  conformity   with   central  schemes of  legal and  administra- 
tive standardization.   The campaign  of linguistic  centralization   was as- 
sured of some success since it went hand  in hand with  an expansion  of 
state power. By the  late nineteenth  century,  dealing with  the  state was 
unavoidable  for  all  but  a small minority    of the population.    Petitions, 
court  cases, school documents, applications,  and correspondence with 
officials  were all  of necessity written   in French.  One can hardly  imag- 
ine a more  effective  formula   for  immediately   devaluing  local  knowl- 
edge and privileging   all those who  had mastered  the official  linguistic 
code.  It  was  a gigantic   shift  in  power.  Those  at the  periphery   who 
lacked  competence   in  French   were  rendered   mute  and  marginal. 
They were now  in need of a local guide  to the new state culture,  which 
appeared in  the form  of lawyers,  notaires, schoolteachers,  clerks,  and 
soldiers.65 
     A cultural   project,  as one might suspect, lurked  behind  the linguis- 
tic centralization.   French  was seen as the bearer of a national  civiliza- 

90
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 73 


tion;  the purpose   of imposing   it  was not  merely  to have  provincials 
digest the  Code  Napoleon   but  also  to bring   them  Voltaire,   Racine, 
Parisian  newspapers,  and  a national   education.   As Weber  provoca- 
tively puts  it,  "There can be no clearer  expression  of imperialist   senti- 
ment,  a white   man's burden   of  Francophony,  whose  first  conquests 
were to  be right   at home."66 Where the  command  of  Latin  had  once 
defined participation   in  a wider culture  for  a small elite,  the command 
of standard  French  now  defined  full  participation    in  French culture. 
The implicit   logic  of  the move  was to  define  a hierarchy   of cultures, 
relegating  local   languages  and their   regional   cultures  to,  at  best, a 
quaint provincialism.   At the apex of this implicit  pyramid  was Paris and 
its institutions:    ministries,   schools,  academies  (including   the guard- 
ian of the language,  l'Acad6mie  Franqaise). The relative  success of this 
cultural  project  hinged on both coercion  and inducements.  "It  was cen- 
tralization,"   says Alexandre Sanguinetti,  "which  permitted   the making 
of France despite  the French,  or in  the midst  of their  indifference.   . . . 
France  is a  deliberate  political    construction   for  whose  creation   the 
central  power has never  ceased to fight.'j6' Standard  (Parisian)  French 
and Paris were not  only focal  points of power;  they were also magnets. 
The growth   of markets,   physical  mobility,   new careers,  political   pa- 
tronage,  public  service,  and a  national  educational   system all  meant 
that facility   in French and connections  to Paris were the paths  of social 
advancement  and  material  success. It  was a state  simplification   that 
promised  to reward  those who  complied  with  its logic  and to penalize 
those who ignored  it. 


The Centralization     of  Traffic  Patterns 

The  linguistic   centralization    impelled  by  the  imposition   of  Parisian 
French  as the  official   standard  was  replicated  in  a  centralization   of 
traffic.  Just as the new dispensation  in language  made Paris the hub  of 
communication,   so the new road and  rail  systems increasingly favored 
movement  to and  from  Paris over  interregional   or  local  traffic.  State 
policy  resembled,  in  computer  parlance,  a  "hardwiring"    pattern  that 
made the  provinces  far  more  accessible,  far  more  legible,  to central 
authorities   than even the absolutist  kings had  imagined. 
     Let  us contrast,  in an  overly schematic  way, a relatively  uncentral- 
ized  network  of  communication,    on one hand,  with   a relatively  cen- 
tralized   network,  on  the other.  If  mapped,  the uncentralized   pattern 
would  be  the physical   image  of the  actual  movements  of  goods and 
people  along  routes  not  created  by  administrative    fiat.  Such  move- 
ments would  not  be random;  they would  reflect  both the ease of travel 

91
74  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 





























               11. Paths created by use and topography 


along valleys,  by watercourses,   and around  defiles  and also the  loca- 
tion of  important  resources and ritual   sites. Weber captures the wealth 
of  human  activities   that  animate  these movements   across the  land- 
scape: "They  served professional   pursuits,   like  the special  trails   fol- 
lowed by  glassmakers, carriers  or  sellers of salt,  potters,  or those that 
led to  forges, mines,  quarries,  and  hemp fields,  or those  along which 
flax, hemp,  linen,  and yarn were  taken to market.  There were  pilgrim- 
age routes and procession  trails."68 
     If  we can imagine,  for the sake of argument,  a place where physical 
resources are evenly  distributed  and there  are no great physical  barri- 
ers to movement  (such as mountains  or swamps),  then a map of  paths 
in use might  form  a network  resembling  a dense concentration  of cap- 
illaries   (figure  11).  The tracings   would,  of  course,  never be  entirely 
random.  Market  towns based on location   and resources would  consti- 
tute small  hubs, as would  religious  shrines, quarries,  mines, and other 
important   sites.69 In  the  French  case as well,   the network   of  roads 
would  have long reflected the  centralizing  ambitions  of local  lords and 
the nation's  monarchs.  The point  of this  illustrative   idealization,  how- 
ever, is  to  depict  a landscape  of  communication    routes  that  is  only 

92
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 75 

























              12. Centralized traffic hub 

lightly  marked by state centralization.   It would  resemble in  many ways 
the cityscape of late  fourteenth-century   Bruges, shown  earlier. 
     Beginning   with  Colbert,  the state-building   modernizers   of France 
were bent on superimposing  on this  pattern  a carefully planned  grid  of 
administrative   centrali~ation.'~  Their  scheme, never  entirely  realized, 
was to align  highways,  canals,  and ultimately   rail  lines to  radiate  out 
from  Paris  like  the  spokes of  a wheel  (figure   12). The similarity    be- 
tween this   grid  and  the tire-aire  of  the  well-managed   state forest  as 
conceived  by Colbert  was  not  accidental.  They were  both  devised to 
maximize  access and to facilitate  central  control.  And  the kind  of sim- 
plification   involved   was,  again,  entirely   relative  to  location.   For  an 
official  at the hub,  it was now  much  easier to go to A or  to B along  the 
new routes. The layout  was designed "to  serve the government and  the 
cities and  lacking  a network  of  supporting  thoroughfares   had little   to 
do with  popular  habit or  need. Administrative   highways, a historian  of 
the center called  them, [were]  made for troops  to march  on and for tax 
revenues to reach the treasury.""  For anyone wanting  to travel  or move 
goods between A and B, however, things  were not  so simple. Just as all 
documents had  to "pass through"  the official  legal  language, so too did 
much of  the commercial  traffic   have to pass through  the capital. 
     The  driving   intellectual   force  behind  this  esprit gLomLtrique  was, 
and has remained,   the renowned  engineers  of the  Corps des Ponts et 

93
76  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


Chau~sees.~~ Victor Legrand, the director   of  Ponts et des  Chaussees, 
was the originator  of the belle idie  of seven grand lines of junction  link- 
ing Paris to points  from the Atlantic  to  the Mediterranean.  His  plan be- 
came known as the Legrand Star  and was proposed first  for canals and 
then, with  greater  effect, for railroads   (among them  the Gare du Nord 
and Gare de l'E~t).'~ 
     As a centralizing   aesthetic, the  plan defied  the canons of  commer- 
cial logic  or cost-effectiveness. The first  phase of the grid, the line  from 
Paris east to Strasbourg  and the frontier,   ran straight  through  the pla- 
teau of Brie  rather  than  following  the  centers of population   along the 
Marne.  By refusing  to  conform  to  the topography   in its  quest of geo- 
metric  perfection,  the railway  line  was ruinously   expensive compared 
to English  or German  railroads.  The army  had also  adopted the Ponts 
et Chaussees logic, believing that  direct  rail  lines to the borders  would 
be militarily   advantageous.  They were proven  tragically   wrong  in  the 
Franco-Prussian  War of 1870-7  1 .74 
     This  retrofitting    of  traffic   patterns  had  enormous  consequences, 
most of which  were intended:  linking  provincial   France and provincial 
French citizens to  Paris and to the state and facilitating  the deployment 
of troops from  the capital to put  down civil  unrest  in any department  in 
the nation. It  was aimed at achieving,  for the military   control  of the na- 
tion,  what  Haussmann  had achieved  in  the capital   itself.  It  thus em- 
powered Paris and  the state at the expense of the provinces,  greatly af- 
fected the economics  of location,  expedited  central  fiscal  and military 
control,  and severed or weakened lateral  cultural  and economic  ties by 
favoring  hierarchical   links.  At a stroke, it  marginalized   outlying  areas 
in the way  that official  French  had marginalized   local  dialects. 


Conclusion 

Officials  of the  modern  state are, of  necessity, at least  one step-and 
often several  steps-removed    from   the society they  are charged  with 
governing.  They  assess the life  of  their   society  by a  series of  typifi- 
cations  that  are always  some distance  from  the  full  reality   these ab- 
stractions  are meant  to capture.  Thus the foresters'  charts  and tables, 
despite  their  synoptic   power  to  distill   many  individual    facts  into  a 
larger  pattern,  do  not  quite  capture  (nor  are they  meant  to) the  real 
forest in  its full  diversity.  Thus  the cadastral  survey and  the title  deed 
are a rough, often misleading  representation  of actual, existing rights  to 
land use and disposal. The functionary  of  any large organization  "sees" 
the human  activity   that  is of interest  to  him  largely  through  the  sim- 
plified  approximations   of documents  and statistics:  tax proceeds,  lists 

94
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 77 


of taxpayers, land  records, average incomes, unemployment   numbers, 
mortality   rates,  trade  and  productivity    figures,  the  total  number   of 
cases of cholera in a certain  district. 
     These typifications   are  indispensable  to  statecraft.  State  simplifi- 
cations such  as maps, censuses, cadastral  lists, and  standard  units of 
measurement  represent techniques  for  grasping  a large  and complex 
reality;  in  order  for  officials  to be  able to comprehend   aspects of the 
ensemble, that complex  reality  must be reduced  to schematic categor- 
ies. The only  way to  accomplish  this  is to  reduce  an infinite   array  of 
detail to  a set of categories  that  will  facilitate   summary  descriptions, 
comparisons, and aggregation.  The invention,  elaboration,  and deploy- 
ment of  these abstractions   represent,  as Charles Tilly  has  shown,  an 
enormous  leap in  state  capacity-a     move  from  tribute   and  indirect 
rule to taxation   and direct  rule.  Indirect  rule  required  only  a minimal 
state apparatus  but  rested  on local  elites  and communities   who  had 
an interest  in withholding    resources  and knowledge  from  the  center. 
Direct  rule  sparked  widespread  resistance  and necessitated  negotia- 
tions that  often  limited  the  center's power,  but for  the first  time,  it  al- 
lowed  state officials   direct  knowledge   of and  access to  a previously 
opaque society. 
     Such  is the power  of the  most advanced  techniques  of direct  rule, 
that it discovers new social truths  as well as merely summarizing known 
facts. The  Center for  Disease  Control  in  Atlanta  is  a striking   case in 
point.  Its network  of sample hospitals  allowed it  to first  "discover"-in 
the epidemiological   sense-such    hitherto   unknown   diseases as toxic 
shock  syndrome,  Legionnaires'   disease, and  AIDS.  Stylized   facts of 
this kind   are a powerful   form  of state  knowledge,  making  it  possible 
for  officials  to intervene   early in  epidemics,  to  understand  economic 
trends that  greatly  affect  public  welfare,  to  gauge whether  their  poli- 
cies are having the  desired effect, and to make  policy with  many  of the 
crucial   facts  at hand.'=  These facts  permit   discriminating     interven- 
tions, some of which  are  literally  lifesaving. 
     The techniques  devised  to enhance the  legibility   of a society  to its 
rulers have become vastly more  sophisticated, but  the political  motives 
driving  them  have changed  little.  Appropriation,    control,  and manip- 
ulation  (in the  nonpejorative  sense) remain  the most prominent.   If  we 
imagine  a state that has no reliable means of enumerating  and locating 
its population,    gauging  its wealth,   and mapping   its  land,  resources, 
and settlements,  we are imagining   a state whose interventions   in  that 
society are necessarily  crude. A  society that is relatively   opaque to the 
state is thereby  insulated  from  some forms  of finely  tuned  state inter- 
ventions,  both  welcomed  (universal  vaccinations)   and resented  (per- 

95
78  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


sonal income taxes). The interventions   it does experience will  typically 
be mediated  by local  trackers  who  know  the  society from  inside  and 
who are likely  to interpose  their  own  particular   interests. Without  this 
mediation-and     often with  it-state     action  is likely to be inept, greatly 
overshooting  or undershooting   its objective. 
     An illegible   society, then,  is a hindrance   to  any effective  interven- 
tion by the state, whether  the purpose of that  intervention  is plunder  or 
public welfare.  As long as the state's interest is largely confined to  grab- 
bing a few  tons of  grain  and rounding   up a few  conscripts,  the state's 
ignorance  may  not  be fatal.  When,  however,  the state's objective  re- 
quires changing  the daily  habits  (hygiene or  health practices)  or work 
performance   (quality  labor  or  machine  maintenance)   of  its citizens, 
such ignorance can well  be disabling. A thoroughly  legible society elim- 
inates local  monopolies  of  information   and creates a kind   of national 
transparency  through the  uniformity  of  codes, identities, statistics, reg- 
ulations,  and measures.  At the same time  it is  likely to  create new po- 
sitional  advantages for  those at the apex who  have the knowledge  and 
access to easily decipher  the new state-created  format. 
     The discriminating    interventions   that  a legible  society makes pos- 
sible can,  of  course, be  deadly  as well.  A sobering  instance  is word- 
lessly recalled by a map produced  by the City Office of  Statistics of Am- 
sterdam, then  under Nazi  occupation,  in May  194 1 (figure 1 3).76 Along 
with  lists  of  residents,  the map  was the  synoptic  representation   that 
guided the  rounding  up of the city's  Jewish population,   sixty-five thou- 
sand of whom  were eventually  deported. 
     The map is titled  "The Distribution  of Jews in the Municipality."  Each 
dot represents  ten Jews,  a scheme that  makes the heavily  Jewish  dis- 
tricts  readily  apparent.   The map was  compiled  from  information   ob- 
tained  not  only  through  the  order  for  people  of Jewish  extraction  to 
register  themselves but  also through   the population   registry  ("excep- 
tionally   comprehensive  in  the  nether land^")^^  and the  business reg- 
istry. If one reflects briefly  on the kind of detailed information   on names, 
addresses, and ethnic  backgrounds  (determined   perhaps by names in 
the population   registry  or by declaration)  and the  cartographic  exacti- 
tude required   to produce  this  statistical  representation,   the contribu- 
tion  of  legibility   to state  capacity  is evident.  The  Nazi authorities    of 
course, supplied   the murderous  purpose  behind  the exercise,  but the 
legibility   provided  by the  Dutch  authorities   supplied  the means to  its 
efficient  implementati~n.'~That    legibility,   I should  emphasize, merely 
amplifies  the capacity  of the state for  discriminating   interventions-a 
capacity  that  in  principle   could  as easily have been  deployed to  feed 
the Jews as to deport  them. 

96
                                                                               Cities, People, and Language 79 


















                                            [To view this image, refer to  
                                            the print version of this title.] 
                                             
                                             
                                             


















13. Map produced by the City  Office of Statistics of Amsterdam and entitled 
"The Distribution  of Jews in the Municipality  (May  1941)" 


      Legibility     implies    a  viewer   whose   place    is central     and  whose   vi- 
sion  is synoptic.   State  simplifications      of the  kind   we have  examined    are 
designed  to  provide   authorities    with   a schematic   view   of their   society,  a 
view  not  afforded    to those  without     authority.    Rather   like  U.S.  highway 
patrolmen    wearing    mirrored    sunglasses,   the  authorities    enjoy   a quasi- 
monopolistic      picture     of  selected    aspects   of  the   whole    society.   This 
privileged    vantage    point   is  typical    of  all   institutional      settings    where 
command    and  control   of  complex   human    activities    is paramount.     The 
monastery,   the   barracks,    the  factory   floor,   and  the  administrative       bu- 
reaucracy    (private     or  public)    exercise    many   statelike    functions     and 
often  mimic    its  information      structure    as well. 

97
80  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


     State simplifications   can be considered  part  of an ongoing  "project 
of legibility,"  a project  that is never fully  realized.  The data from  which 
such simplifications    arise are,  to varying   degrees, riddled  with   inac- 
curacies,  omissions,  faulty  aggregations,  fraud,   negligence,  political 
distortion,   and so on. A project   of legibility   is immanent   in any state- 
craft that  aims  at manipulating   society, but  it is undermined   by intra- 
state rivalries,  technical   obstacles, and, above all,  the resistance of  its 
subjects. 
     State simplifications    have at least  five characteristics   that  deserve 
emphasis. Most obviously, state simplifications   are observations of only 
those aspects of  social life  that  are of  official  interest.  They  are inter- 
ested, utilitarian  facts. Second, they are also nearly always written   (ver- 
bal  or numerical)   documentary   facts. Third,   they  are typically   static 
facts.79 Fourth, most stylized state facts are also aggregate facts. Aggre- 
gate facts may be impersonal   (the density  of transportation   networks) 
or simply  a collection  of facts about  individuals  (employment  rates, lit- 
eracy rates,  residence patterns).  Finally,  for  most purposes,  state offi- 
cials need to group  citizens in  ways that permit  them  to make a collec- 
tive assessment. Facts that can be aggregated and presented as averages 
or distributions   must  therefore be standardized  facts. However  unique 
the actual circumstances of the various  individuals  who make up the ag- 
gregate, it is their  sameness or, more precisely, their differences along a 
standardized  scale or continuum  that  are of interest. 
     The process by which  standardized  facts susceptible to aggregation 
are manufactured  seems to require  at least three steps. The first,  indis- 
pensable step is the creation  of common  units of  measurement or  cod- 
ing. Size classes of trees, freehold tenure, the metric system for measur- 
ing landed  property  or the volume  of grain,  uniform  naming  practices, 
sections of prairie  land,  and urban lots of  standard sizes are among the 
units  created for  this  purpose. In  the next  step, each item  or  instance 
falling  within  a category is counted  and classified according  to the new 
unit  of assessment. A particular  tree reappears  as an instance of a cer- 
tain size class of tree; a particular  plot  of agricultural   land reappears as 
coordinates  in  a cadastral   map; a  particular   job  reappears  as an in- 
stance of a category of employment; a particular  person reappears bear- 
ing a name  according  to the new  formula.  Each fact  must be recuper- 
ated and brought  back on stage, as it were, dressed in a new uniform  of 
official  weave-as    part of  "a series in a total classificatory  grid."80 Only 
in  such  garb  can  these  facts  play  a  role  in  the  culmination    of  the 
process: the creation  of wholly  new facts by  aggregation, following   the 
logic of the new  units. One arrives, finally,  at synoptic facts that are use- 
ful to officials:  so many thousands of trees in  a given size class, so many 

98
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 8 1 


thousands of men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-five,  so many 
farms in  a given  size class,  so many  students whose  surnames begin 
with the  letter A, so many people with  tuberculosis.  Combining   several 
metrics of aggregation,  one arrives at  quite subtle, complex,  heretofore 
unknown  truths,  including,  for  example, the  distribution   of tubercular 
patients by income  and urban location. 
     To call such elaborate  artifacts  of knowledge  "state simplifications" 
risks being misleading.  They are anything  but simple-minded,  and they 
are often  wielded   with   great  sophistication   by  officials.   Rather, the 
term  "simplification"    is meant  in  two  quite  specific  senses. First, the 
knowledge that  an official   needs must give him  or her  a synoptic view 
of the  ensemble;  it  must  be cast  in  terms  that  are replicable   across 
many cases. In this respect, such facts must  lose their particularity    and 
reappear  in  schematic  or  simplified   form  as a  member  of a  class of 
facts.81 Second, in a meaning  closely related  to the first,  the  grouping 
of synoptic  facts necessarily entails  collapsing  or ignoring   distinctions 
that might  otherwise  be relevant. 
     Take, for example,  simplifications   about employment.  The working 
lives of many  people are exceptionally   complex  and may change from 
day to day. For the purposes of  official  statistics, however,  being "gain- 
fully  employed"  is a  stylized fact;  one is  or is not  gainfully   employed. 
Also, available  characterizations    of many  rather  exotic  working   lives 
are sharply   restricted  by  the categories  used  in the  aggregate  statis- 
tic~.~*Those  who gather and interpret  such aggregate data understand 
that there  is a certain  fictional  and arbitrary   quality  to their  categories 
and that  they  hide a wealth   of problematic   variation.   Once set, how- 
ever,  these thin    categories  operate   unavoidably   as  if  all   similarly 
classified  cases were in  fact  homogeneous  and uniform.   All  Normal- 
baume in  a given size range are the same; all soil  in a defined soil  class 
is statistically    identical;   all  autoworkers  (if  we  are  classifying  by  in- 
dustry)  are alike;  all  Catholics (if  we are  classifying  by religious  faith) 
are alike. There  is, as Theodore Porter notes in his  study of mechanical 
objectivity,   a  "strong  incentive  to  prefer   precise  and standardizable 
measures to highly  accurate ones," since accuracy is meaningless  if the 
identical  procedure   cannot reliably  be performed   elsewhere.83 
     To  this point,   I  have been making   a rather   straightforward,    even 
banal  point  about the simplification,    abstraction,  and  standardization 
that  are necessary for state officials'  observations  of the circumstances 
of  some or all  of the  population.   But  I want  to  make a further   claim, 
one  analogous to  that  made for  scientific   forestry:  the  modern  state, 
through  its  officials,  attempts  with  varying  success to create  a terrain 
and a population  with  precisely  those standardized characteristics   that 

99
82  LEGIBILITY AND SIMPLIFICATION 


will  be easiest to monitor, count,  assess, and manage. The utopian, im- 
manent,  and continually   frustrated   goal of  the modern   state is to  re- 
duce the chaotic, disorderly,  constantly  changing social  reality beneath 
it to something  more  closely  resembling  the administrative   grid  of  its 
observations.  Much  of the  statecraft  of  the late  eighteenth  and  nine- 
teenth centuries  was  devoted to  this  project.  "In  the  period  of move- 
ment from  tribute  to tax,  from  indirect  rule  to direct  rule,  from subor- 
dination  to  assimilation,"   Tilly   remarks,  "states  generally  worked  to 
homogenize their  populations   and break  down  their  segmentation  by 
imposing  common languages, religions,  currencies,  and legal  systems, 
as well  as promoting  the  construction   of connected  systems of trade, 
transportation,   and comm~nication."~~ 
     As the  scientific   forester  may  dream  of  a perfectly   legible  forest 
planted  with    same-aged,  single-species,  uniform    trees  growing   in 
straight  lines in  a rectangular  flat  space cleared of all  underbrush  and 
poachers,85 so the exacting state official  may aspire to  a perfectly  legi- 
ble population   with  registered,  unique  names and addresses keyed to 
grid  settlements;  who pursue  single,  identifiable  occupations;   and all 
of  whose transactions   are  documented  according   to  the  designated 
formula  and in the official  language. This  caricature  of society as a mil- 
itary  parade  ground  is  overdrawn,   but  the grain  of  truth  that  it  em- 
bodies may  help us  understand  the  grandiose  plans we will   examine 
later.86 The aspiration to such uniformity   and order  alerts us to the fact 
that  modern   statecraft  is  largely  a  project   of internal    colonization, 
often glossed, as it is in imperial   rhetoric,  as a "civilizing   mission." The 
builders  of the  modern  nation-state  do  not  merely describe,  observe, 
and map; they  strive to shape a people and  landscape that will   fit their 
techniques of  0bservation.~7 
     This tendency  is perhaps one shared by many large  hierarchical  or- 
ganizations.  As  Donald  Chisholm,  in  reviewing   the literature    on ad- 
ministrative  coordination,   concludes, "central  coordinating  schemes do 
work effectively  under conditions  where the task environment  is known 
and unchanging, where  it can be treated as a closed system."88 The more 
static,  standardized,  and  uniform  a population   or  social  space is, the 
more legible  it is, and the more  amenable it is to the techniques  of state 
officials.  I am suggesting that  many state activities  aim at transforming 
the  population,   space,  and  nature  under  their   jurisdiction    into  the 
closed systems that  offer  no  surprises  and  that can  best be observed 
and controlled. 
     State officials  can often make their  categories stick and impose their 
simplifications,   because the state, of all institutions,  is best equipped to 
insist  on treating   people  according   to its  schemata.  Thus categories 

100
                                                                       Cities, People, and Language 83 


that may have begun as the artificial   inventions  of cadastral  surveyors, 
census takers,  judges,  or  police  officers  can  end  by becoming   cate- 
gories that  organize  people's daily  experience  precisely  because they 
are embedded  in  state-created  institutions   that  structure   that  exper- 
                     Theien~e.~~ economic plan, survey map, record of ownership, forest 
management plan,  classification   of ethnicity,  passbook, arrest  record, 
and map of  political  boundaries   acquire  their  force from  the  fact that 
these synoptic   data  are  the  points  of  departure   for  reality   as  state 
officials  apprehend  and shape it.  In dictatorial   settings  where there  is 
no effective way  to assert another  reality,  fictitious   facts-on-paper  can 
often be made eventually  to prevail  on  the ground,  because it is on be- 
half of  such pieces of paper that  police  and army  are deployed. 
     These paper records  are the  operative facts  in a court  of law,  in an 
administrative   dossier,  and before  most  functionaries.    In  this sense, 
there are  virtually   no other  facts for  the state than  those that  are con- 
tained  in documents  standardized  for that  purpose. An error   in such a 
document  can have far more power-and      for far  longer-than     can an 
unreported   truth.   If,  for  example, you  want  to  defend your   claim  to 
real property,   you are normally   obliged  to  defend it  with  a document 
called a property  deed, and to do so in the courts  and tribunals  created 
for  that  purpose.  If  you  wish  to have  any standing   in law,  you  must 
have a  document  that  officials   accept  as evidence  of citizenship,   be 
that  document  a birth  certificate,  passport,  or  identity  card.  The cate- 
gories  used by state agents  are not  merely means  to make  their  envi- 
ronment   legible;  they are  an authoritative   tune  to  which  most  of the 
population  must  dance. 

102
Part 2 



          Transforming Visions 

104
3       Authoritarian                      High         Modernism 


    Then, as this morning on the dock, again I saw, as if for the first time in my 
    life, the impeccably straight streets, the glistening glass of the pavement, the 
    divine parallelepipeds of the transparent dwellings, the square harmony of the 
    grayish blue rows of Numbers. And it seemed to me that not past generations, 
    but I myself, had won a victory over the old god and the old life. 
    -Eugene Zamiatin, We 

    Modern science, which displaced and replaced God, removed that obstacle [lim- 
    its on freedom]. It also created a vacancy: the office of the supreme legislator- 
    cum-manager, of the designer and administrator of the world order, was now 
    horrifyingly empty. It had to be filled or else. . . . The emptiness of the throne 
    was throughout the modern era a standing and tempting invitation to vision- 
    aries and adventurers. The dream of an all-embracing order and harmony re- 
    mained as vivid as ever, and it seemed now closer than ever, more than ever 
    within human reach. It was now up to mortal earthlings to bring it about and 
    to secure its ascendancy. 
    -Zygmunt Bauman, Modernity and the Holocaust 


All the state simplifications that we have examined have the character 
of maps. That is, they are designed to summarize precisely those as- 
pects of a complex world that are of immediate interest to the map- 
maker and to ignore the rest. To complain that a map lacks nuance and 
detail makes no sense unless it omits information necessary to its func- 
tion. A city map that aspired to represent every traffic light, every pot- 
hole, every building, and every bush and tree  in every park  would 
threaten to become as large and as complex as the city that it depicted.' 
And it certainly would defeat the purpose of mapping, which is to ab- 
stract and summarize. A map is an instrument designed for a purpose. 
We may judge that purpose noble or morally offensive, but the map it- 
self either serves or fails to serve its intended use. 
     In case after case, however, we have remarked on the apparent 
power of maps to transform as well as merely to summarize the facts 
that they portray. This transformative power resides not in the map, of 
course, but rather in  the power possessed by those who deploy the 
perspective of that particular map.2 A private corporation aiming to 
maximize sustainable timber yields, profit, or production will map its 
world according to this logic and will use what power it has to ensure 
that the logic of its map prevails. The state has no monopoly on utili- 
tarian simplifications. What the state does at least aspire to, though, is 

105
88  TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


a monopoly on  the legitimate  use of force. That  is surely why, from  the 
seventeenth century until  now, the most transformative  maps have been 
those invented and applied  by the most  powerful  institution   in society: 
the state. 
     Until  recently, the  ability  of the state to impose  its schemes on soci- 
ety was limited  by the state's modest ambitions and its limited   capacity. 
Although  utopian   aspirations  to  a finely  tuned  social  control   can be 
traced  back to  Enlightenment   thought   and to  monastic  and  military 
practices,  the  eighteenth-century    European  state  was still   largely  a 
machine for  extraction.  It  is true that  state officials,  particularly   under 
absolutism,  had mapped  much  more  of their   kingdoms'  populations, 
land tenures,  production,   and  trade  than their  predecessors  had and 
that they had become increasingly  efficient  in  pumping  revenue, grain, 
and conscripts  from  the countryside.   But there  was more  than a little 
irony  in their  claim  to  absolute rule.  They  lacked the consistent  coer- 
cive power, the fine-grained  administrative   grid,  or the detailed knowl- 
edge that would  have permitted   them to undertake  more  intrusive  ex- 
periments  in  social engineering.   To give their  growing   ambitions  full 
rein, they required  a far greater hubris, a state machinery that was equal 
to the  task,  and a  society they  could  master.  By  the mid-nineteenth 
century in  the West and by the early twentieth  century  elsewhere, these 
conditions  were being  met. 
     I believe that  many of the most tragic  episodes of state development 
in the  late  nineteenth  and twentieth   centuries  originate   in  a particu- 
larly  pernicious  combination   of three elements.  The first  is the aspira- 
tion to  the administrative   ordering  of nature  and society, an aspiration 
that we  have already seen at work  in scientific   forestry, but  one raised 
to a far  more comprehensive   and ambitious  level.  "High  modernism" 
seems an appropriate term  for this                          Asa~piration.~ a faith, it was shared 
by many  across a wide  spectrum  of political   ideologies.  Its  main car- 
riers  and exponents were the  avant-garde among  engineers, planners, 
technocrats,  high-level   administrators,    architects,  scientists,  and  vi- 
sionaries.  If one were  to imagine  a pantheon  or  Hall  of Fame of high- 
modernist   figures,  it  would  almost   certainly  include   such  names as 
Henri  Comte de Saint-Simon,  Le Corbusier,  Walther Rathenau,  Robert 
McNamara,  Robert Moses, Jean Monnet, the Shah of Iran, David Lilien- 
thal,  Vladimir   I. Lenin,  Leon  Trotsky, and  Julius N~erere.~They  envi- 
sioned a sweeping,  rational   engineering  of all  aspects of social  life  in 
order  to  improve   the human   condition.   As a  conviction,   high  mod- 
ernism  was not the exclusive property   of any political   tendency; it had 
both right-  and  left-wing  variants,  as we shall see. The second element 
is the unrestrained   use of the power  of  the modern  state as an instru- 

106
                                                                   Authoritarian High Modernism 89 


ment for  achieving  these designs. The third   element is  a weakened or 
prostrate  civil  society that  lacks the  capacity to  resist these plans. The 
ideology of  high modernism   provides,  as it were,  the desire; the  mod- 
ern  state provides  the  means of  acting  on  that  desire;  and the  inca- 
pacitated  civil  society  provides  the  leveled terrain   on which   to build 
(dis)utopias. 
     We shall  return   shortly   to  the premises  of  high  modernism.   But 
here  it  is important    to  note that   many  of the  great  state-sponsored 
calamities  of the  twentieth  century  have been the  work  of rulers  with 
grandiose and  utopian  plans for  their  society. One can identify  a high- 
modernist  utopianism  of  the right,  of which  Nazism  is surely the diag- 
nostic  e~ample.~The  massive  social  engineering  under  apartheid   in 
South  Africa,  the modernization    plans of  the Shah  of Iran,  villagiza- 
tion  in Vietnam,  and huge  late-colonial  development  schemes (for  ex- 
ample, the Gezira scheme in the  Sudan) could be considered under this 
rubric.6  And yet  there  is no  denying  that much  of  the massive,  state- 
enforced social  engineering of  the twentieth  century has been the work 
of progressive,  often revolutionary   elites.  Why? 
     The answer, I  believe, lies in the  fact that it  is typically  progressives 
who have come to  power with  a comprehensive  critique  of existing  so- 
ciety  and a popular   mandate  (at least initially)    to transform   it. These 
progressives  have wanted  to use that power  to bring   about enormous 
changes in  people's habits,  work,  living  patterns,  moral  conduct,   and 
worldview.'   They have deployed what  Vaclav Have1 has called "the  ar- 
mory  of  holistic  social  engineering.'I8  Utopian  aspirations   per  se are 
not  dangerous. As Oscar  Wilde remarked,   "A map of the  world  which 
does not include  Utopia  is not  worth  even glancing  at, for it  leaves out 
the one country  at which  Humanity  is always  landing.'I9 Where the uto- 
pian  vision goes wrong  is when  it is held  by ruling  elites  with  no com- 
mitment   to democracy  or  civil  rights   and who  are therefore   likely  to 
use unbridled   state power  for  its achievement.  Where  it goes brutally 
wrong  is when the society  subjected to such utopian  experiments  lacks 
the capacity  to mount  a determined  resistance. 
     What  is high modernism,   then? It is best conceived as a strong (one 
might  even  say muscle-bound)  version  of  the beliefs  in scientific   and 
technical  progress  that were associated with  industrialization    in West- 
ern  Europe  and in North  America  from  roughly   1830 until  World War 
I.  At its  center was  a supreme self-confidence   about continued   linear 
progress,  the development   of scientific   and technical   knowledge,  the 
expansion  of production,   the rational  design  of social order,  the grow- 
ing  satisfaction  of human  needs, and,  not least,  an increasing  control 
over  nature  (including   human   nature)  commensurate  with   scientific 

107
90  TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


understanding  of natural  laws.1Â High modernism is thus a particularly 
sweeping vision of how  the benefits of technical  and scientific  progress 
might be applied-usually      through  the state-in     every field  of human 
activity."   If, as we have seen, the simplified,   utilitarian   descriptions  of 
state officials  had  a tendency, through   the exercise  of state power,  to 
bring the  facts into  line with  their  representations,  then  one might  say 
that  the high-modern    state began  with  extensive  prescriptions   for  a 
new society, and it  intended to  impose them. 
     It  would   have been  hard  not  to  have  been a  modernist   of some 
stripe at the  end of the nineteenth  century  in  the West. How could  one 
fail to be impressed-even    awed-by     the vast transformation   wrought 
by science  and  industry?12 Anyone  who  was,  say, sixty  years  old  in 
Manchester,  England,  would  have  witnessed  in  his or  her  lifetime   a 
revolution   in   the  manufacturing     of  cotton   and   wool  textiles,   the 
growth  of the factory system, the application   of steam power and other 
astounding  new mechanical  devices to production,   remarkable  break- 
throughs  in metallurgy   and transportation    (especially  railroads),  and 
the appearance of cheap mass-produced  commodities.  Given the  stun- 
ning advances in chemistry,  physics, medicine,  math, and  engineering, 
anyone even slightly   attentive  to the  world   of science would  have  al- 
most come to  expect a continuing   stream of new  marvels  (such as the 
internal  combustion  engine and  electricity).  The unprecedented  trans- 
formations  of the nineteenth  century  may have impoverished  and mar- 
ginalized  many, but  even the victims  recognized  that  something  revo- 
lutionary   was afoot.  All  this  sounds rather  naive  today, when  we  are 
far  more  sober about  the  limits   and costs  of technological    progress 
and have acquired  a postmodern   skepticism  about  any totalizing   dis- 
course.  Still,   this  new  sensibility   ignores  both  the  degree  to which 
modernist   assumptions  prevail  in  our  lives and,  especially, the  great 
enthusiasm   and revolutionary    hubris   that  were   part  and  parcel  of 
high  modernism. 


The Discovery   of  Society 

The path from  description  to prescription   was not so much an inadver- 
tent result  of a deep psychological  tendency  as a deliberate move.  The 
point  of the  Enlightenment   view of  legal codes was less to  mirror   the 
distinctive  customs  and practices  of a people than  to create  a cultural 
community   by codifying   and  generalizing  the  most  rational  of  those 
customs and suppressing the more  obscure and barbaric  ones.13 Estab- 
lishing  uniform   standards  of weight  and  measurement  across a king- 
dom  had  a greater  purpose  than  just   making  trade  easier;  the  new 

108
                                                                   Authoritarian High Modernism 9 1 


standards  were  intended  both  to express  and to  promote  a new  cul- 
tural  unity. Well  before the tools  existed to  make good on this  cultural 
revolution,   Enlightenment   thinkers   such  as Condorcet  were  looking 
ahead to the  day when the  tools would  be in  place. He wrote  in  1782: 
"Those sciences, created almost in  our own  days, the object of which  is 
man himself,  the direct  goal of  which  is the happiness of man,  will  en- 
joy a progress  no less sure than  that of  the physical  sciences, and this 
idea so sweet, that our  descendants will  surpass us in wisdom  as in en- 
lightenment,   is no  longer  an illusion.   In  meditating   on the  nature  of 
the moral  sciences, one cannot  help seeing that,  as they are based like 
physical  sciences on the observation of  fact, they must follow  the  same 
method,  acquire  a  language equally   exact and  precise,  attaining  the 
same degree of                             The~ertainty."~~ gleam in Condorcet's eye became, by 
the mid-nineteenth    century,  an active  utopian  project.  Simplification 
and  rationalization    previously   applied  to  forests,  weights  and  mea- 
sures, taxation,  and factories  were now applied  to the design of society 
as a whole.15 Industrial-strength    social  engineering   was born.  While 
factories  and  forests might   be planned  by private  entrepreneurs,   the 
ambition  of  engineering  whole  societies was almost  exclusively a pro- 
ject of  the nation-state. 
     This  new conception   of the state's role  represented  a fundamental 
transformation.   Before  then, the state's activities  had been largely con- 
fined  to those  that  contributed  to  the wealth   and power  of the  sover- 
eign,  as the  example of  scientific   forestry  and  camera1 science illus- 
trated.  The  idea that  one of  the central  purposes  of the  state was the 
improvement   of  all  the members  of  society-their      health,  skills  and 
education,  longevity,  productivity,   morals,  and  family  life-was     quite 
novel.16 There was, of course, a direct connection  between the old  con- 
ception  of the state and this  new one. A state that  improved  its popula- 
tion's skills,  vigor,  civic  morals, and work  habits  would  increase its tax 
base and field  better  armies;  it was  a policy  that any  enlightened  sov- 
ereign  might  pursue. And yet,  in the nineteenth  century,  the welfare  of 
the population   came increasingly   to be seen, not merely as a means to 
national   strength, but  as an end in itself. 
      One essential  precondition   of this  transformation    was the discov- 
 ery of society  as a reified  object  that was  separate from  the  state and 
that  could  be scientifically    described.  In this  respect,  the production 
 of statistical  knowledge   about the population-its       age profiles,  occu- 
 pations,  fertility,    literacy,   property   ownership,   law-abidingness   (as 
 demonstrated  by   crime  statistics)-allowed       state  officials   to  char- 
 acterize  the  population    in  elaborate  new   ways,  much  as  scientific 
 forestry permitted  the forester to carefully  describe the forest. Ian Hack- 

109
92  TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


ing explains  how a suicide  or  homicide  rate,  for example,  came to  be 
seen as a characteristic  of a people, so that one could  speak of a "bud- 
get" of homicides  that  would  be "spent"  each year, like  routine  debits 
from an account,  although  the particular    murderers  and their  victims 
were unknown.17 Statistical   facts were  elaborated  into  social laws.  It 
was but a  small step  from  a simplified   description   of society  to a de- 
sign and manipulation   of society, with  its improvement   in mind.  If one 
could  reshape  nature  to  design  a more  suitable   forest,  why  not  re- 
shape society to create  a more suitable  population? 
     The scope of intervention   was potentially   endless. Society  became 
an object  that the  state might   manage and transform   with   a view to- 
ward  perfecting   it. A  progressive  nation-state   would  set about  engi- 
neering its society according  to the  most advanced technical  standards 
of the new  moral  sciences. The existing  social  order,  which  had been 
more or less taken by earlier  states as a given, reproducing  itself under 
the watchful  eye of the state, was for  the first  time the subject  of active 
management.  It  was possible  to conceive  of  an artificial,   engineered 
society designed, not by custom  and historical   accident, but  according 
to conscious, rational,  scientific  criteria.   Every nook  and cranny of  the 
social  order  might   be improved   upon:  personal  hygiene,  diet,  child 
rearing,  housing, posture,  recreation,  family  structure,  and, most  infa- 
mously, the genetic  inheritance  of  the                               Thepop~lation.~~ working poor 
were often the first  subjects of scientific  social planning.19 Schemes for 
improving   their   daily  lives  were  promulgated   by progressive   urban 
and public-health   policies  and  instituted   in model  factory  towns  and 
newly founded welfare agencies. Subpopulations  found wanting  in ways 
that were  potentially   threatening-such      as indigents,  vagabonds, the 
mentally  ill,  and criminals-might       be made the objects of the most in- 
tensive social engineering.20 
     The metaphor   of gardening,  Zygmunt   Bauman  suggests, captures 
much of this  new spirit.  The gardener-perhaps     a landscape  architect 
specializing  in formal  gardens  is the most appropriate  parallel-takes 
a natural site and  creates an entirely designed space of botanical  order. 
Although the organic  character  of the flora limits  what can be achieved, 
the gardener  has enormous discretion   in the  overall arrangement   and 
in training,   pruning,  planting,   and weeding  out selected plants.  As an 
untended forest  is to a long-managed  scientific  forest, so untended  na- 
ture is to the garden.  The garden is one of man's attempts to impose his 
own principles   of order, utility,   and beauty on nature.21 What grows in 
the garden is always a small, consciously selected sample of what might 
be grown there. Similarly,  social engineers consciously  set out to design 
and maintain   a more perfect  social  order. An  Enlightenment   belief in 

110
                                                                   Authoritarian High Modernism 93 


the self-improvement   of man  became, by degrees,  a belief in  the per- 
fectibility  of  social order. 
     One of the great  paradoxes of social  engineering  is that  it seems at 
odds with the  experience of modernity   generally. Trying  to jell  a social 
world,  the  most  striking   characteristic   of  which   appears to  be flux, 
seems rather   like  trying  to  manage  a  whirlwind.    Marx   was hardly 
alone in claiming  that  the "constant  revolutionizing   of production,   un- 
interrupted   disturbance  of all social  relations,  everlasting  uncertainty 
and agitation,  distinguish  the bourgeois epoch from  all earlier  times."22 
The experience  of modernity   (in  literature,   art,  industry,  transporta- 
tion, and  popular  culture)  was, above all,  the experience  of disorient- 
ing speed, movement,  and change, which  self-proclaimed   modernists 
found exhilarating   and liberating.23 Perhaps the most charitable way  of 
resolving  this  paradox  is to imagine   that what  these  designers of  so- 
ciety had  in  mind  was roughly  what  designers  of locomotives   had in 
mind  with   "streamlining."   Rather  than  arresting  social  change,  they 
hoped to design a shape to social  life that  would  minimize   the friction 
of progress. The difficulty   with  this resolution   is that  state social engi- 
neering was  inherently   authoritarian.   In  place  of multiple   sources of 
invention  and change,  there was a single  planning  authority;   in  place 
of the plasticity   and autonomy  of existing  social life,  there  was a fixed 
social order  in which  positions  were designated.  The tendency toward 
various forms  of "social  taxidermy"  was  unavoidable. 


The Radical   Authority   of  High  Modernism 

    The real thing is that this time we're going to get science applied to social 
    problems and backed by the whole force of the state, just as war has been 
    backed by the whole force of the state in the past. 
     -C.   S. Lewis, That Hideous Strength 

The troubling   features  of high  modernism   derive,  for  the  most  part, 
from its  claim to speak about the improvement   of the human  condition 
with  the authority  of  scientific  knowledge and  its tendency to  disallow 
other competing  sources of judgment. 
     First  and  foremost,  high modernism   implies  a truly   radical  break 
with  history   and tradition.   Insofar   as rational  thought   and  scientific 
laws could  provide  a single answer  to every empirical   question,  noth- 
ing ought  to be taken for  granted. All  human  habits and  practices that 
were inherited  and  hence not based on scientific  reasoning-    from  the 
structure  of  the family  and patterns   of residence to  moral  values and 
forms  of production-would       have to  be reexamined  and  redesigned. 
The structures  of the  past were typically   the products  of  myth,  super- 

111
94 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


stition, and religious prejudice. It followed that scientifically designed 
schemes for production and social life would be superior to received 
tradition. 
    The sources of this view are deeply authoritarian. If a planned so- 
cial order is better than the accidental, irrational deposit of historical 
practice, two conclusions follow. Only those who have the scientific 
knowledge to discern and create this superior social order are fit to 
rule in the new age. Further, those who through retrograde ignorance 
refuse to yield to the scientific plan need to be educated to its benefits 
or else swept aside. Strong versions of high modernism, such as those 
held by Lenin and Le Corbusier, cultivated an Olympian ruthlessness 
toward the subjects of their  interventions. At its most radical,  high 
modernism imagined wiping  the slate utterly  clean and  beginning 
from zero.24 
     High-modernist ideology thus tends to devalue or banish politics. 
Political interests can only frustrate the social solutions devised by spe- 
cialists with scientific tools adequate to their analysis. As individuals, 
high modernists might well hold democratic views about popular sov- 
ereignty or classical liberal views about the inviolability of a private 
sphere that restrained them, but such convictions are external to, and 
often at war with, their high-modernist convictions. 
     Although high modernists came to imagine the refashioning of so- 
cial habits and of human nature itself, they began with a nearly limit- 
less ambition to transform nature to suit man's purposes-an ambition 
that remained central to their faith. How completely the utopian pos- 
sibilities gripped intellectuals of almost every political persuasion is 
captured in the paean to technical progress of the Communist Mani- 
festo, where Marx  and Engels write  of  the "subjection of  nature's 
forces to man, machinery, and the application of chemistry to agri- 
culture and industry, steam navigation, railways, electric telegraphs, 
clearing of  whole continents for  cultivation,  canalization of rivers, 
whole populations conjured out of the ground."25 In fact, this promise, 
made plausible by capitalist development, was for Marx the point of 
departure for socialism, which would place the fruits of capitalism at 
the service of the working class for the first time. The intellectual air in 
the late nineteenth century was filled with proposals for such vast engi- 
neering projects as the Suez Canal, which was completed in 1869 with 
enormous consequences for trade between Asia and Europe. The pages 
of Le globe, the organ of utopian socialists of Saint-Simon's persuasion, 
featured an endless stream of discussions about massive projects: the 
construction of Panama Canal, the development of the United States, 
far-reaching schemes for energy and transportation. This belief that it 

112
                                                                   Authoritarian High Modernism 95 


was man's destiny to tame  nature to  suit his  interests and  preserve his 
safety is perhaps  the keystone of  high  modernism,  partly  because the 
success of so many grand ventures  was already manifest.26 
     Once again the  authoritarian   and  statist implications   of this  vision 
are clear. The very  scale of such  projects  meant that,  with  few  excep- 
tions  (such  as the  early   canals),  they  demanded  large   infusions  of 
monies raised through  taxes or  credit. Even  if one could  imagine them 
being  financed  privately    in  a capitalist    economy,  they  typically   re- 
quired a vast public  authority  empowered to condemn private  property, 
relocate  people  against  their  will,   guarantee  the  loans  or  bonds  re- 
quired, and coordinate  the work  of the many state agencies involved. In 
a statist society, be it Louis  Napoleon's France or  Lenin's Soviet Union, 
such power  was already  built  into  the political   system. In a nonstatist 
society, such  tasks  have required   new  public   authorities   or  "super- 
agencies" having  quasi-governmental   powers  for  sending  men to  the 
moon or for  constructing  dams, irrigation   works,  highways, and public 
transportation   systems. 
     The temporal  emphasis of high  modernism  is almost  exclusively on 
the future.  Although   any ideology  with  a large  altar  dedicated to  pro- 
gress is bound  to privilege   the future,  high  modernism   carries this  to 
great lengths.  The past  is an impediment,   a history  that must  be tran- 
scended; the present is the platform   for launching  plans for  a better fu- 
ture.  A key characteristic   of discourses  of high  modernism  and  of the 
public  pronouncements  of those states that have embraced it  is a heavy 
reliance  on  visual  images  of heroic   progress  toward  a  totally  trans- 
formed  future.27 The  strategic  choice  of  the  future  is  freighted   with 
consequences. To the degree that the future is known  and achievable- 
a belief  that the faith  in  progress encourages-the     less future  benefits 
are discounted  for uncertainty.   The practical  effect is to convince  most 
high  modernists  that the  certainty  of a better  future  justifies  the many 
short-term   sacrifices  required  to get  there.28 The ubiquity  of five-year 
plans  in  socialist  states is an  example  of that  conviction.   Progress  is 
objectified   by  a series  of  preconceived  goals-largely      material   and 
quantifiable-which       are to be achieved through  savings, labor, and in- 
vestments  in  the  interim.  There  may,  of course,  be no  alternative   to 
planning,  especially when  the urgency of a single goal, such as winning 
a war,  seems to require the  subordination   of every other  goal. The im- 
manent  logic   of such  an exercise,  however,  implies  a  degree of  cer- 
tainty  about  the future,  about  means-ends calculations,  and  about the 
meaning  of  human  welfare  that  is truly  heroic.  That  such plans  have 
often  had  to  be adjusted  or  abandoned  is  an  indication   of just  how 
heroic  are the  assumptions behind  them. 

113
96  TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     In  this  reading,   high  modernism   ought   to appeal  greatly   to  the 
classes and  strata   who  have  most  to  gain-in       status,  power,  and 
wealth-from      its worldview.   And  indeed it  is  the ideology  par  excel- 
lence of the bureaucratic   intelligentsia,  technicians,  planners,  and  en- 
gineer~.*~The  position  accorded  to  them  is not  just  one  of rule  and 
privilege  but  also one  of responsibility    for the  great  works  of nation 
building  and social transformation.   Where this  intelligentsia  conceives 
of its mission  as the dragging  of  a technically  backward,   unschooled, 
subsistence-oriented   population   into  the  twentieth   century,   its self- 
assigned cultural  role  as educator  of its people  becomes doubly gran- 
diose. Having  a historic  mission  of such breadth  may provide  a ruling 
intelligentsia  with  high  morale,  solidarity,  and the willingness  to make 
(and impose)  sacrifices.  This vision  of a great  future  is often  in  sharp 
contrast  to the disorder,  misery,  and unseemly  scramble  for  petty ad- 
vantage that  the  elites very  likely   see in their   daily  foreground.   One 
might in  fact speculate that  the more  intractable  and resistant  the real 
world  faced by  the planner,  the greater  the  need for  utopian  plans to 
fill,  as it were, the  void that  would  otherwise  invite  despair. The  elites 
who elaborate such plans  implicitly   represent themselves as exemplars 
of the learning  and progressive views to which  their  compatriots  might 
aspire. Given  the ideological   advantages of  high modernism   as a dis- 
course,  it is  hardly  surprising    that  so many  postcolonial   elites have 
marched under  its banner.30 
     Aided  by  hindsight   as it  is,  this  unsympathetic   account   of high- 
modernist  audacity  is,  in one important   respect,  grossly unfair.   If we 
put the  development  of high-modernist   beliefs  in their  historical   con- 
text, if we ask who  the enemies of high modernism   actually were,  a far 
more  sympathetic  picture   emerges. Doctors   and public-health    engi- 
neers who did  possess new knowledge that could  save millions  of lives 
were often thwarted  by popular  prejudices  and entrenched political   in- 
terests. Urban planners  who could  in fact redesign urban  housing to be 
cheaper, more  healthful,   and more  convenient  were blocked  by  real- 
estate interests  and existing  tastes. Inventors   and engineers  who had 
devised revolutionary   new  modes of  power  and transportation    faced 
opposition  from  industrialists   and laborers  whose profits  and jobs the 
new technology  would  almost certainly   displace. 
     For nineteenth-century    high modernists,   the scientific  domination 
of nature  (including   human   nature)  was emancipatory.   It  "promised 
freedom from  scarcity, want  and the arbitrariness   of natural  calamity," 
David  Harvey  observes. "The development  of  rational  forms  of social 
organization  and  rational  modes of  thought  promised  liberation  from 
the irrationalities   of myth,  religion,  superstition,   release from the arbi- 

114
                                                                   Authoritarian High Modernism 97 


trary  use of  power  as  well  as from   the dark   side of  our  human  na- 
ture~."~' Before we turn to later  versions of high  modernism,  we should 
recall  two  important   facts  about  their  nineteenth-century    forebears: 
first, that  virtually   every high-modernist   intervention   was undertaken 
in the name  of and  with  the support  of  citizens  seeking help and  pro- 
tection, and,  second, that we are all beneficiaries,   in countless ways, of 
these various high-modernist   schemes. 


Twentieth-Century    High   Modernism 

The idea  of a  root-and-branch,   rational    engineering  of  entire  social 
orders  in  creating   realizable   utopias  is  a largely   twentieth-century 
phenomenon.  And a range of historical   soils have seemed particularly 
favorable for  the flourishing   of high-modernist  ideology. Those soils in- 
clude crises  of  state power, such  as wars  and economic  depressions, 
and circumstances  in which  a state's capacity for  relatively  unimpeded 
planning  is  greatly  enhanced,  such  as the revolutionary    conquest  of 
power  and colonial  rule. 
     The  industrial   warfare  of  the  twentieth   century  has  required  un- 
precedented steps toward  the  total mobilization    of the society and  the 
economy.32 Even quite liberal societies like the United States and Britain 
became, in the context  of war  mobilization,  directly   administered  soci- 
eties. The worldwide   depression  of  the  1930s similarly  propelled   lib- 
eral states into  extensive experiments in  social and economic  planning 
in  an effort  to  relieve  economic  distress  and to  retain  popular  legiti- 
macy. In  the cases of war  and depression,  the rush  toward  an admin- 
istered  society  has an  aspect of  force  majeure to  it.  The postwar   re- 
building  of  a war-torn  nation  may well  fall  in the same category. 
     Revolution   and colonialism,   however,  are hospitable  to high  mod- 
ernism  for  different   reasons.  A revolutionary    regime  and  a colonial 
regime  each disposes of an  unusual  degree of power.  The revolution- 
ary state has defeated  the ancien  regime, often  has its partisans'  man- 
date to  remake  the society  after  its image,  and faces a prostrate   civil 
society  whose capacity   for  active resistance  is  limited.33 The  millen- 
nial  expectations commonly  associated with  revolutionary   movements 
give  further  impetus  to  high-modernist   ambitions.   Colonial  regimes, 
particularly    late  colonial  regimes,  have  often  been sites of  extensive 
experiments  in  social engineering.34 An ideology  of  "welfare  colonial- 
ism"  combined  with  the authoritarian   power  inherent   in colonial  rule 
have encouraged  ambitious  schemes to remake native  societies. 
      If  one were  required  to  pinpoint   the  "birth"   of twentieth-century 
high  modernism,  specifying  a particular   time, place,  and individual- 

115
98  TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


in what  is admittedly   a rather  arbitrary   exercise,  given high  modern- 
ism's many  intellectual   wellsprings-a       strong  case can be made  for 
German mobilization    during  World  War I  and the figure  most  closely 
associated with  it, Walther  Rathenau.  German economic  mobilization 
was the technocratic  wonder  of the war. That  Germany kept  its armies 
in  the field   and  adequately  supplied  long   after  most  observers  had 
predicted  its  collapse  was  largely  due  to  Rathenau's  planning.35 An 
industrial   engineer  and  head of  the  great  electrical  firm   A.E.G  (All- 
gemeine  Elektricitats-Gesellschaft),    which   had  been founded  by  his 
father, Rathenau  was placed in  charge of the  Office of War Raw  Mate- 
rials                                                       He(Kt-ieg~rohstoffabteilung).~~ realized that the planned ration- 
ing of  raw  materials  and transport   was the  key to sustaining   the war 
effort.  Inventing  a planned  economy step by step, as it were,  Germany 
achieved  feats-in     industrial   production,    munitions   and  armament 
supply, transportation    and traffic  control,   price  controls,  and civilian 
rationing-that      had  never before  been attempted.  The scope of  plan- 
ning and  coordination   necessitated an unprecedented  mobilization   of 
conscripts,  soldiers,  and war-related   industrial   labor.  Such mobiliza- 
tion  fostered  the idea  of creating   "administered   mass organizations" 
that would  encompass the  entire ~ociety.~' 
     Rathenau's faith  in pervasive  planning  and in rationalizing   produc- 
tion  had  deep  roots  in  the intellectual    connection   being  forged  be- 
tween the physical  laws  of thermodynamics   on one hand  and the new 
applied  sciences of work  on the  other. For many  specialists,  a narrow 
and materialist   "productivism"    treated  human  labor  as a mechanical 
system which  could be decomposed into  energy transfers,  motion,  and 
the physics of  work. The simplification    of labor  into  isolated problems 
of mechanical  efficiencies  led directly   to the aspiration   for a scientific 
control  of  the entire  labor  process. Late  nineteenth-century   material- 
ism,  as Anson  Rabinbach  emphasizes,  had  an  equivalence  between 
technology  and physiology  at its metaphysical  core.38 
     This  productivism   had  at least  two  distinct  lineages,  one  of them 
North  American   and the  other  European.  An American   contribution 
came from  the  influential  work  of  Frederick  Taylor, whose minute  de- 
composition   of factory  labor  into  isolable,  precise, repetitive   motions 
had begun to  revolutionize   the organization   of factory  work.39 For the 
factory  manager  or  engineer, the  newly  invented  assembly lines  per- 
mitted  the use of unskilled  labor  and  control  over not  only the pace of 
production   but  the  whole  labor  process.  The  European  tradition    of 
'energetics,"  which  focused on questions  of motion,  fatigue,  measured 
rest, rational  hygiene, and  nutrition,   also treated the worker  notionally 
as a machine,  albeit a machine  that  must be well  fed and kept  in good 

116
                                                                   Authoritarian High Modernism 99 


working  order.  In  place  of workers,  there  was an  abstract,  standard- 
ized worker  with  uniform  physical  capacities  and needs. Seen initially 
as a way of increasing  wartime   efficiency  at the front   and in industry, 
the Kaiser Wilhelm   Institut  fur  Arbeitsphysiologie,   like Taylorism,  was 
based on a scheme to rationalize  the  body.40 
     What  is most remarkable  about  both traditions   is, once again, how 
widely they  were believed by educated elites who  were otherwise  poles 
apart politically.   "Taylorism   and technocracy  were the  watchwords  of 
a three-pronged  idealism:  the  elimination   of economic  and social  cri- 
sis, the expansion  of productivity   through  science, and the  reenchant- 
ment of  technology.  The vision  of society  in which  social  conflict  was 
eliminated   in favor  of  technological   and scientific   imperatives   could 
embrace liberal,  socialist,  authoritarian,   and  even communist  and fas- 
cist solutions.   Productivism,   in short,  was politically    promisc~ous."~~ 
     The appeal  of one or another  form  of productivism   across much  of 
the right   and  center  of the  political   spectrum   was largely  due  to  its 
promise  as a technological   "fix"  for  class struggle. If,  as its advocates 
claimed,  it could  vastly increase worker   output,  then the politics  of re- 
distribution    could  be replaced  by  class collaboration,   in  which  both 
profits  and  wages could  grow  at  once. For  much  of the  left,  produc- 
tivism  promised the  replacement  of the capitalist  by the engineer or  by 
the state expert  or official.  It  also proposed a single  optimum  solution, 
or  "best practice,"   for  any problem   in the  organization   of  work.  The 
logical  outcome  was  some form  of slide-rule   authoritarianism    in  the 
interest,  presumably, of  all.42 
     A combination   of Rathenau's broad  training  in philosophy  and  eco- 
nomics,  his wartime   experience with  planning,   and the social  conclu- 
sions that he thought  were  inherent  in the  precision,  reach, and trans- 
forming  potential   of electric  power  allowed  him  to draw  the broadest 
lessons for  social organization.   In  the war, private  industry   had given 
way to  a kind  of  state socialism;   "gigantic  industrial    enterprises  had 
transcended  their  ostensibly  private  owners  and all  the  laws of prop- 
                   Theert~."~~ decisions required had nothing to do with ideology; they 
were driven  by purely  technical   and economic  necessities. The rule  of 
specialists  and  the new  technological   possibilities,   particularly   huge 
electric  power  grids,  made possible a new  social-industrial   order  that 
was both  centralized   and locally   autonomous.  During  the  time when 
war  made necessary  a coalition  among  industrial   firms,  technocrats, 
and  the state,  Rathenau  discerned  the shape  of a progressive  peace- 
time  society.  Inasmuch  as the  technical  and  economic  requirements 
for  reconstruction   were obvious  and required  the  same sort of collab- 
oration  in  all countries,  Rathenau's rationalist   faith in  planning  had an 

117
100 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


internationalist   flavor. He characterized  the modern  era as a "new ma- 
chine order  . . . [and] a consolidation   of the world  into  an unconscious 
association of constraint,  into  an uninterrupted   community   of produc- 
tion and harmony."44 
     The world  war  was the high-water   mark  for the  political  influence 
of engineers  and planners.  Having  seen what  could  be accomplished 
in extremis,  they imagined  what they  could  achieve if the identical  en- 
ergy and planning   were devoted  to popular  welfare  rather   than mass 
destruction.  Together with  many political   leaders, industrialists,   labor 
leaders, and prominent   intellectuals  (such as Philip  Gibbs in  England, 
Ernst  Jiinger  in Germany,  and  Gustave Le Bon  in  France),  they con- 
cluded that only  a renewed and comprehensive  dedication  to technical 
innovation  and  the planning  it  made possible  could rebuild   the Euro- 
pean economies and bring  social  peace.45 
     Lenin  himself  was  deeply impressed  by  the achievements  of  Ger- 
man industrial   mobilization   and  believed that  it  had shown  how pro- 
duction  might  be socialized. Just as Lenin  believed that  Marx  had dis- 
covered immutable   social laws  akin  to Darwin's  laws  of evolution,   so 
he believed that  the new technologies  of  mass production  were  scien- 
tific  laws and not  social constructions.   Barely  a month  before the  Oc- 
tober  1917 revolution,  he wrote  that  the war  had "accelerated  the de- 
velopment   of  capitalism   to  such  a  tremendous   degree,  converting 
monopoly  capitalism   into state-monopoly   capitalism,  that  neither  the 
proletariat   nor the revolutionary   petty-bourgeois   democrats  can keep 
within  the  limits  of                               He~apitalism."~~ and his economic advisers drew 
directly  on the work  of Rathenau  and Mollendorf   in their  plans for  the 
Soviet  economy. The  German  war  economy  was for  Lenin   "the ulti- 
mate in  modern, large-scale  capitalist  techniques,  planning   and orga- 
nization";  he took it  to be the prototype  of  a socialized economy.47 Pre- 
sumably, if the state in  question were in  the hands of representatives of 
the working  class, the basis of a socialist system would  exist. Lenin's vi- 
sion of  the future  looked  much  like  Rathenau's, providing,   of  course, 
we ignore  the not so small  matter  of a revolutionary   seizure  of power. 
     Lenin   was not  slow  to  appreciate   how  Taylorism  on  the  factory 
floor  offered   advantages for   the socialist   control   of production.    Al- 
though  he had  earlier  denounced   such techniques,  calling   them  the 
"scientific  extortion   of sweat," by the time  of the revolution   he had be- 
come an  enthusiastic  advocate  of  systematic  control   as practiced  in 
Germany.  He extolled   "the principle   of  discipline,   organization,   and 
harmonious  cooperation  based upon the most modern,  mechanized in- 
dustry, the most  rigid  system of accountability   and control."48 

118
                                                                 Authoritarian High Modernism 10 1 


    The Taylor system, the last word  of capitalism  in this  respect, like all 
     capitalist  progress, is a combination   of the subtle  brutality  of  bour- 
     geois exploitation and a number of its great scientific achievements in 
     the fields of analysing mechanical  motions during  work,  the elimina- 
     tion of superfluous and awkward  motions, the  working  out of correct 
     methods of work, the introduction of the best system of accounting and 
     control, etc. The Soviet Republic must at all costs adopt all that is valu- 
     able in the achievements of science and technology in this field. . . . We 
     must organize in  Russia the study and teaching  of the Taylor  system 
     and systematically try it out and adapt it to our  purposes.49 

     By  1918,  with   production   falling,   he was  calling   for  rigid   work 
norms  and, if  necessary, the  reintroduction    of hated  piecework.   The 
first All-Russian  Congress for Initiatives   in Scientific  Management  was 
convened  in  1921  and featured   disputes  between  advocates  of Tay- 
lorism  and those of energetics (also called ergonomics).  At least twenty 
institutes  and as many journals were  by then devoted to scientific  man- 
agement in  the Soviet  Union. A  command  economy at the  macrolevel 
and Taylorist principles   of central coordination   at the microlevel  of  the 
factory  floor  provided  an attractive   and symbiotic   package for  an au- 
thoritarian,   high-modernist   revolutionary   like  Lenin. 
     Despite  the  authoritarian    temptations    of twentieth-century     high 
modernism,   they have  often been  resisted.  The reasons  are not  only 
complex;  they are different  from  case to case. While it  is not my  inten- 
tion  to examine  in detail  all  the potential   obstacles to high-modernist 
planning,  the particular   barrier   posed by liberal  democratic  ideas and 
institutions   deserves emphasis. Three factors seem decisive. The first is 
the  existence and  belief  in  a  private  sphere  of  activity  in  which   the 
state and  its  agencies may not  legitimately   interfere.   To be sure, this 
zone  of  autonomy   has  had   a beleaguered   existence  as,  following 
Mannheim,   more heretofore   private  spheres have been  made the ob- 
ject of  official  intervention.   Much  of the  work  of Michel  Foucault  was 
an attempt   to map  these incursions   into  health,  sexuality, mental   ill- 
ness, vagrancy,  or sanitation   and  the strategies  behind  them.  Never- 
theless, the idea of  a private realm  has served to limit   the ambitions  of 
many  high  modernists,   through   either  their  own   political   values  or 
their  healthy  respect for the political   storm that  such incursions  would 
provoke. 
      The second, closely related factor  is the private  sector in  liberal  po- 
litical   economy. As Foucault  put  it:  unlike  absolutism   and mercantil- 
ism,  "political    economy  announces the  unknowability    for  the  sover- 
eign  of the totality   of economic  processes and,  as a consequence, the 
impossibility   of an economic s~vereignty."~~The point of liberal political 
economy  was not  only that  a free market  protected  property   and cre- 

119
102 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


ated wealth  but also that  the economy  was far  too complex  for  it ever 
to be managed in detail  by a hierarchical   admini~tration.~' 
     The third  and by far most  important  barrier  to thoroughgoing   high- 
modernist  schemes has been the existence of  working,  representative 
institutions  through  which   a resistant society could  make its  influence 
felt.  Such institutions   have  thwarted   the most  draconian   features  of 
high-modernist  schemes in roughly the same way that publicity  and mo- 
bilized  opposition  in open  societies, as Amartya  Sen has argued, have 
prevented  famines.  Rulers,  he notes, do  not  go hungry,  and they  are 
unlikely  to learn about  and respond readily  to curb  famine unless their 
institutional    position   provides   strong   incentives.   The  freedoms   of 
speech, of assembly, and  of the press  ensure that  widespread  hunger 
will  be  publicized,   while  the  freedoms  of  assembly and  elections  in 
representative  institutions    ensure that  it  is  in  the interest   of elected 
officials' self-preservation  to prevent famine  when they can. In the same 
fashion,  high-modernist   schemes in  liberal  democratic   settings  must 
accommodate themselves sufficiently  to local  opinion  in order  to avoid 
being undone  at the polls. 
     But  high  modernism,   unimpeded   by liberal   political   economy,  is 
best grasped through the working   out of its high  ambitions  and its con- 
sequences. It is to this  practical  terrain   in urban  planning  and  revolu- 
tionary  discourse that  we now turn. 

120
4       The      High-Modernist                        City: 
         An      Experiment                  and       a   Critique 


    No one, wise Kuublai, knows better than you that the city must never be con- 
    fused with the words that describe it. 
    -1talo Calvino, Invisible Cities 

    Time is a fatal handicap to the baroque conception of the world: its mechani- 
    cal order makes no allowances for growth, change, adaptation, and creative 
    renewal. In short, a baroque plan was a block achievement. It must be laid out 
    at a stroke, fixed and frozen forever, as if done overnight by Arabian nights 
    genii. Such a plan demands an architectural despot, working for an absolute 
    ruler, who will live long enough to complete their own conceptions. To alter 
    this type of plan, to introduce fresh elements of another style, is to break its es- 
    thetic backbone. 
     -Lewis Mumford, The City in History 


In  Mumford's epigraph to  this chapter, his  criticism  is directed  at 
Pierre-Charles L'Enfant's Washington in particular  and at  baroque 
urban planning  in general.' Greatly  amplified, Mumford's criticism 
could be applied to the work and thought of the Swiss-born French es- 
sayist, painter, architect,  and planner  Charles-Edouard Jeanneret, 
who is better known by his professional name, Le Corbusier. Jeanneret 
was the embodiment of high-modernist urban design. Active roughly 
between 1920 and 1960, he was less an architect than a visionary plan- 
ner  of planetary  ambitions. The great  majority  of  his gargantuan 
schemes were never built; they typically required a political resolve 
and financial wherewithal that few political authorities could muster. 
Some monuments to his expansive genius do exist, the most notable of 
which are perhaps Chandigarh, the austere capital of India's Punjab, 
and L'Unitk d'Habitation, a large apartment complex in Marseilles, but 
his legacy is most apparent in the logic of his unbuilt megaprojects. 
At one time or another he proposed city-planning schemes for Paris, 
Algiers, S5o Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, Buenos Aires, Stockholm, Geneva, 
and Bar~elona.~His early politics was a bizarre combination of Sorel's 
revolutionary syndicalism and Saint-Simon's utopian modernism, and 
he designed both in Soviet Russia (1928-36)3 and in Vichy for Mar- 
shal Philippe Pktain. The key manifesto of modern urban planning, 
the Athens charter of the Congrks Internationaux dlArchitecture Mod- 
erne (CIAM), faithfully reflected his doctrines. 

121
104 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     Le Corbusier  embraced  the huge,  machine-age,  hierarchical,   cen- 
tralized  city with   a vengeance. If  one were looking  for  a caricature- 
a Colonel Blimp,  as it were, of modernist  urbanism-one     could  hardly 
do better than  to invent  Le  Corbusier. His  views were  extreme but  in- 
fluential,   and  they were   representative   in  the  sense that  they  cele- 
brated the  logic  implicit    in  high  modernism.   In  his daring,   his bril- 
liance,  and  his  consistency,  Le  Corbusier   casts the  high-modernist 
faith in  sharp relief.4 


Total City  Planning 

In  The Radiant City  (La ville  radieuse),  published  in  1933 and repub- 
lished with  few changes in 1964, Le Corbusier offers the most  complete 
exposition of his  views.5 Here as elsewhere, Le Corbusier's  plans were 
self-consciously immodest.   If E.  F. Schumacher made the  case for the 
virtue  of smallness, Le Corbusier  asserted, in  effect, "Big  is beautiful." 
The best way  to appreciate  the  sheer extravagance  of  his reach  is to 
look briefly  at three  of his designs. The first  is the core idea  behind his 
Plan Voisin  for  central  Paris (figure   14); the second,  a new "business 
city"  for Buenos Aires  (figure  15); and the  last, a vast housing  scheme 
for about ninety  thousand  residents in Rio  de Janeiro (figure  16). 
     In  their  magnitude,  these plans speak for  themselves. No  compro- 
mise is made  with  the preexisting   city;  the new  cityscape completely 
supplants its predecessor. In each case, the new city has striking  sculp- 
tural  properties;  it  is designed  to make  a powerful  visual  impact  as a 
form. That impact,  it  is worth  noting,  can be had only from  a great dis- 
tance. Buenos Aires is pictured  as if seen from many miles  out to sea: a 
view of  the New World   "after  a two-week  crossing," writes  Le  Corbu- 
sier, adopting the perspective of  a modern-day Christopher  Col~mbus.~ 
Rio is seen at several miles remove, as if from  an airplane. What  we be- 
hold is a six-kilometer-long   highway  elevated one hundred  meters and 
enclosing a continuous  ribbon of fifteen-story  apartments.  The new city 
literally  towers  over the  old. The plan  for a city  of 3 million   in  Paris is 
seen from far  above and outside, the distance  emphasized by dots rep- 
resenting vehicles  on the  major  avenue as well  as by a small airplane 
and what  appears to be a helicopter.  None of  the plans makes any ref- 
erence to the urban  history,  traditions,   or aesthetic  tastes of the place 
in which  it  is to  be located. The  cities depicted,  however  striking,   be- 
tray  no  context;  in  their   neutrality,   they  could   be anywhere   at  all. 
While  astoundingly  high  construction   costs may explain  why  none of 
these projects  was ever  adopted,  Le Corbusier's  refusal  to  make any 
appeal to local  pride  in an existing  city  cannot have helped his  case. 

122
                                                   [To view this image, refer to  
                                                   the print version of this title.] 
                                                    
                                                    
                                                    






14.  Le Corbusier's    Plan  Voisin  for  Paris,  a  city  of 3  million   people 
















                                                    [To view this image, refer to  
                                                    the print version of this title.] 
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     














 15.  Le Corbusier's    plan  for  the  "business  city"   of  Buenos  Aires,  as  if seen  from 
an  approaching    ship 

123
106 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 




                                         [To view this image, refer to  
                                         the print version of this title.] 
                                          
                                          
                                          



16. Le Corbusier's plan for roads and housing in Rio de Janeiro 


     Le  Corbusier  had  no  patience  for  the  physical  environment   that 
centuries  of urban  living  had created.  He heaped scorn  on the tangle, 
darkness,  and  disorder,  the  crowded   and pestilential    conditions,   of 
Paris and  other  European  cities at  the turn  of the  century.  Part of his 
scorn was, as we shall  see, on functional  and scientific   grounds; a city 
that  was to become  efficient  and  healthful  would  indeed  have had  to 
demolish  much   of what  it   had inherited.    But  another  source  of  his 
scorn  was aesthetic. He  was visually  offended  by disarray  and  confu- 
sion. And the disorder  he wished to correct  was not so much a disorder 
at ground  level but  a disorder  that was a function   of distance, a bird's- 
eye view.7 His  mixed motives  are  nicely  captured  in  his judgment  on 
small  rural   properties   as  seen from  the  air   (figure   17). "From   air- 
planes,  a look  down  on  infinitely    subdivided,  incongruously   shaped 
plots of  land. The more  modern  machinery  develops, the  more land  is 
chopped up  into  tiny  holdings  that  render  the miraculous   promise  of 
machinery   useless. The result  is waste:  inefficient,    individual   scrab- 
bling."8 The purely formal  order was at least as important  as the accom- 
modation  with  the machine  age. "Architecture,"   he insisted,  "is the art 
above all  others  which  achieves  a state of platonic   grandeur,  mathe- 
matical   order,  speculation,   the  perception    of  harmony   that  lies  in 
emotional  relation~hips."~ 
     Formal,  geometric simplicity   and functional  efficiency  were not two 
distinct  goals to be balanced;  on the contrary,  formal  order  was a pre- 
condition  of  efficiency.  Le Corbusier  set himself  the  task of inventing 
the ideal  industrial   city, in  which  the "general  truths"   behind  the ma- 
chine  age would  be expressed with  graphic   simplicity.  The  rigor  and 
unity  of this ideal  city required  that  it make  as few concessions as pos- 
sible to the history  of existing  cities. "We must refuse to  afford even the 
slightest  concession to  what is:  to the  mess we are in  now," he wrote. 
"There  is no  solution  to be  found  there." Instead,  his  new city  would 
preferably  rise on a cleared  site as a single, integrated  urban composi- 

124
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 107 











                                         [To view this image, refer to  
                                         the print version of this title.] 
                                          
                                          
                                          










17. Aerial view of Alsace, circa 1930, from Le Corbusier's La ville radieuse 


tion.  Le Corbusier's  new urban  order  was to be a  lyrical  marriage  be- 
tween Cartesian pure forms and the implacable  requirements  of the ma- 
chine.  In characteristically    bombastic  terms,  he declared,  "We claim, 
in  the name  of the  steamship,  the  airplane,  and  the automobile,   the 
right  to health,  logic,  daring,  harmony,  perfection."1Â Unlike the  exist- 
ing city  of Paris,  which  to him  resembled  a "porcupine"   and a "vision 
of Dante's Inferno,"   his city  would  be an  "organized,  serene, forceful, 
airy, ordered  entity."l 


Geometry and Standardization 

     It  is impossible  to  read much  of Le Corbusier  or to see many of  his 
architectural   drawings   without  noticing   his love  (mania?) for  simple, 
repetitive   lines  and  his  horror   of  complexity.   He makes  a  personal 
commitment   to austere lines and represents that  commitment  as an es- 
sential  characteristic   of human  nature.  In  his own  words,  "an infinity 
of  combinations   is possible  when  innumerable  and  diverse  elements 
are brought  together.  But the human  mind  loses itself and becomes fa- 
tigued  by such a labyrinth  of possibilities.  Control  becomes impossible. 
The spiritual   failure  that must  result is disheartening.   . . . Reason. . . is 
an  unbroken   straight   line.  Thus,  in  order  to  save himself  from   this 

125
108 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


chaos, in order  to provide  himself  with   a bearable, acceptable  frame- 
work  for his  existence, one productive   of human  well-being   and con- 
trol,  man has projected  the laws of  nature into  a system that is a man- 
ifestation  of the human  spirit  itself:  geometry."12 
     When Le  Corbusier  visited  New York  City, he was utterly  taken  by 
the geometric   logic  of  midtown   Manhattan.   The  clarity   of  what  he 
called the "skyscraper machines"  and the street plan  pleased him: "The 
streets are at  right  angles  to each  other  and the  mind  is liberated."I3 
Elsewhere Le Corbusier answered what  he saw as the criticism of those 
who were  nostalgic  for  the  variety  of  the existing   city-in     this  case, 
Paris. People may complain, he noted, that  in reality  streets intersect at 
all sorts of angles and that  the variations  are infinite.   "But," he replied, 
"that's precisely  the point.  Z eliminate  all  those things. That's my start- 
ingpoint.   . . . I insist  on right-angled inter~ections."~~ 
     Le  Corbusier  would  have liked  to  endow  his love  of straight  lines 
and right  angles with   the authority   of the machine,  of  science, and of 
nature.  Neither   the brilliance    of  his designs  nor  the  heat of  his  po- 
lemic, however,  could succeed in justifying  this  move. The machines to 
which  he most adoringly   referred-the      locomotive,  the airplane,  and 
the automobile-embody      rounder  or more  elliptical  shapes than right 
angles (the teardrop  being  the most streamlined   of shapes). As for sci- 
ence, any shape is geometrical:   the trapezoid,  the  triangle,  the  circle. 
If  sheer simplicity   or  efficiency  was the  criterion,   why  not prefer  the 
circle   or sphere-as     the  minimum   surface  enclosing  the  maximum 
space-to     the   square  or   the  rectangle?   Nature,   as  Le  Corbusier 
claimed,  might  be mathematical,  but  the complex,  intricate,  "chaotic" 
logic  of living  forms has only  recently  been understood with  the  aid of 
 computer^.^^ No, the great  architect  was expressing  no more,  and no 
less, than an aesthetic ideology-a     strong  taste for classic lines, which 
he also considered to be  "Gallic"  lines:  "sublime straight  lines,  and oh, 
sublime  French  rigor."16 It was one powerful  way  of mastering  space. 
What's more, it  provided  a legible grid that  could be easily grasped at a 
glance and that  could be repeated in every direction,   ad infinitum.  As a 
practical   matter,  of course,  a straight  line  was often  impractical   and 
ruinously  expensive.  Where the  topography  was irregular,   building   a 
straight,  flat  avenue without   daunting  climbs  and  descents would  re- 
quire  great feats of digging  and leveling.  Le Corbusier's  kind  of geom- 
etry was rarely  cost effective. 
     He  took his  utopian  scheme for  an abstract,  linear  city  to  impres- 
sive lengths.  He foresaw that  the industrialization    of  the construction 
trades would  lead  to a welcome  standardization.   He foresaw, too,  the 
prefabrication   of  houses and office  blocks,  whose parts  were built   at 

126
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 109 


factories  and then assembled at  the building  sites.  The sizes of all ele- 
ments would  be standardized,  with  multiples   of standard  sizes allow- 
ing for unique  combinations  determined  by the architect.  Door frames, 
windows, bricks,  roof tiles,  and even screws would all conform  to a uni- 
form  code. The first manifesto  of CIAM in 1928 called for  the new stan- 
dards to be legislated  by the  League of Nations,  which  would  develop 
a universal  technical   language to be  compulsorily   taught  throughout 
the world.  An international   convention  would  "normalize"   the various 
standard  measurements for  domestic  equipment  and appliances.17 Le 
Corbusier  made  efforts to  practice  what  he preached.  His  design  for 
the mammoth  Palace of Soviets (never built)  was intended  to appeal to 
Soviet high  modernism. The building,   he claimed, would  establish pre- 
cise and  universal   new  standards  for  all  buildings-standards       that 
would  cover  lighting,    heating,  ventilation,   structure,   and  aesthetics 
and that  would  be valid in  all latitudes  for  all needs.18 
     The  straight  line,   the right   angle,  and  the imposition    of interna- 
tional  building  standards  were all  determined  steps in the direction   of 
simplification.    Perhaps the most  decisive  step, however,  was Le  Cor- 
busier's lifelong  insistence on strict  functional  separation.  Indicative   of 
this  doctrine  was  the second  of fourteen  principles   he enunciated   at 
the beginning  of La ville radieuse, namely, "the death of the street." What 
he meant  by  this  was  simply  the  complete  separation   of pedestrian 
traffic   from  vehicle  traffic  and, beyond  that,  the  segregation  of slow- 
from  fast-moving   vehicles.  He abhorred   the mingling   of  pedestrians 
and vehicles,  which  made walking  unpleasant  and impeded  the circu- 
lation  of traffic. 
     The  principle    of  functional    segregation  was  applied   across  the 
board.  Written  by Le Corbusier  and his brother  Pierre,  the final  report 
for  the second meeting  of CIAM, in 1929, began with  an assault on tra- 
ditional   housing  construction:   "The  poverty, the  inadequacy  of tradi- 
tional  techniques have brought  in their  wake a confusion  of powers, an 
artificial    mingling   of functions,   only  indifferently    related  to  one an- 
other.  . . . We must find and apply new methods  . . . lending themselves 
naturally   to standardization,   industrialization,    Taylorization.  . . . If  we 
persist  in  the present  methods  by which   the two  functions   [arrange- 
ment  and furnishing  versus construction;   circulation   versus structure] 
are  mingled  and interdependent,   then  we will  remain  petrified   in  the 
same immobility."19 
      Outside  the  apartment   block,   the  city  itself   was  an  exercise  in 
planned   functional   segregation-an      exercise that   became  standard 
urban-planning   doctrine  until  the  late 1960s. There would  be separate 
zones for workplaces,  residences, shopping  and entertainment  centers, 

127
110 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


and  monuments   and  government  buildings.    Where  possible,  work 
zones were to  be further   subdivided   into  office  buildings   and  facto- 
ries. Le Corbusier's  insistence on  an urban plan  in which  each district 
had one and only  one function  was  evident in  his first  act after  taking 
over the planning   of  Chandigarh,  his  only built   city. He  replaced  the 
housing that  had  been planned  for  the city  center  with  an "acropolis 
of monuments"  on a 220-acre  site at a great distance  from  the nearest 
                           Inre~idences.~~ his Plan Voisin for Paris, he separated what he called 
la ville,  which   was for  dwelling,   and the  business center,  which  was 
for working.   "These are two distinct  functions,   consecutive and not  si- 
multaneous,  representative  of two  distinct   and categorically  separate 
areas."21 
     The logic of this  rigid  segregation of functions  is perfectly  clear. It is 
far easier to plan  an urban  zone if it  has just one purpose.  It is far  eas- 
ier to plan  the circulation   of pedestrians if  they do not have to compete 
with  automobiles  and  trains.  It  is far  easier to plan  a forest  if  its sole 
purpose is to  maximize  the yield  of furniture-grade   timber.  When  two 
purposes must be served  by a single facility   or plan,  the trade-offs  be- 
come nettlesome. When several or  many purposes must be considered, 
the variables  that  the  planner  must juggle   begin to  boggle the  mind. 
Faced with such a labyrinth  of possibilities,  as Le Corbusier  noted, "the 
human mind  loses itself  and becomes fatigued." 
     The segregation  of functions  thus allowed  the planner  to think  with 
greater  clarity  about  efficiency.  If  the only  function   of roads  is to get 
automobiles  from A  to B quickly  and economically,  then  one can com- 
pare two  road  plans  in terms  of  relative  efficiency.  This  logic  is emi- 
nently  reasonable inasmuch  as this is precisely  what  we have in  mind 
when we build   a road from  A to B.  Notice,  however, that  the clarity  is 
achieved  by bracketing   the  many  other  purposes that   we may  want 
roads to  serve, such  as affording  the  leisure  of a touristic   drive,  pro- 
viding  aesthetic  beauty  or visual  interest,   or enabling  the  transfer  of 
heavy goods.  Even in  the case of  roads, narrow   criteria   of efficiency 
ignore other  ends that are not trivial.   In  the case of the places that peo- 
ple call home, narrow   criteria  of efficiency do considerably  greater vio- 
lence to human  practice.  Le Corbusier calculates  the air (la  respiration 
exacte), heat, light, and space people need as a matter  of public  health. 
Starting  with  a figure of fourteen  square meters per person, he reckons 
that  this  could  be reduced  to  ten  square meters  if  such  activities  as 
food preparation   and  laundering  were  communal.  But  here the crite- 
ria  of  efficiency  that  may  apply  to a  road  can hardly   do justice  to  a 
home, which  is variously  used as a place for work,  recreation,  privacy, 
sociability,   education,   cooking,  gossip,  politics,   and  so on.  Each  of 

128
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 11 1 


these activities,   moreover,   resists  being  reduced  to   criteria   of  effi- 
ciency; what  is  going on  in the  kitchen  when  someone is cooking  for 
friends who  have gathered there  is not merely  "food  preparation."  But 
the logic   of efficient   planning   from   above for  large  populations   re- 
quires  that  each of the  values being  maximized   be sharply   specified 
and that   the number   of  values  being  maximized   simultaneously   be 
sharply restricted-preferably       to a single  value.12 The logic of Le Cor- 
busier's  doctrine  was  to  carefully  delineate   urban  space by  use and 
function   so that  single-purpose   planning   and  standardization    were 
possible.23 


Rule by the Plan, the Planner, and the State 

     The  first  of  Le Corbusier's   "principles   of  urbanism,"   before  even 
"the death of the street," was the dictum  "The Plan:                        ItDictat~r."~~would  
be difficult   to  exaggerate  the emphasis  that,  like  Descartes,  Le  Cor- 
busier  placed  on  making  the  city  the reflection   of  a  single,  rational 
plan.  He  greatly  admired   Roman  camps  and imperial    cities  for  the 
overall  logic  of  their  layouts.  He  returned  repeatedly  to  the contrast 
between  the existing  city,  which   is the  product  of  historical   chance, 
and the  city of the  future,  which  would  be consciously  designed  from 
start to  finish following   scientific  principles. 
     The centralization    required  by Le Corbusier's   doctrine  of the  Plan 
(always capitalized   in  his usage) is replicated  by  the centralization   of 
the city  itself. Functional   segregation was joined  to hierarchy.   His city 
was a  "monocephalic"   city,  its centrally   located  core performing    the 
"higher"   functions  of the metropolitan    area. This is how  he described 
the business center  of his Plan Voisin  for  Paris: "From  its offices  come 
the commands  that put  the world  in  order. In  fact, the skyscrapers  are 
the brain  of  the city,  the brain  of the whole  country.  They embody  the 
work   of elaboration    and  command  on  which   all  activities   depend. 
Everything   is  concentrated   there:  the  tools   that  conquer   time  and 
space-telephones,    telegraphs,  radios,  the banks,  trading  houses, the 
organs of  decision for  the factories:  finance,  technology, commerce."25 
     The business center issues commands; it does not suggest, much less 
consult. The program  of high-modernist   authoritarianism   at work  here 
stems in  part  from  Le  Corbusier's  love of  the order  of  the factory.  In 
condemning   the  "rot"    (la  pourriture)   of  the   contemporary   city,  its 
houses, and its streets,  he singles out the factory  as the sole exception. 
There, a single rational  purpose structures  both the physical  layout and 
the coordinated  movements of hundreds. The Van Nelle tobacco factory 
in  Rotterdam  is praised in  particular.  Le  Corbusier admires  its  auster- 

129
112 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


ity, its floor-to-ceiling  windows  on each floor, the order in  the work, and 
the apparent  contentment  of the  workers.  He finishes  with  a hymn  to 
the authoritarian   order of  the production  line.  "There is  a hierarchical 
scale, famously established  and respected," he  admiringly   observes of 
the workers. "They accept it so as to manage themselves like a colony of 
worker-bees: order,  regularity,  punctuality,  justice  and  ~aternalism."~~ 
     The scientific  urban planner  is to the design and construction   of the 
city as the entrepreneur-engineer   is  to the design  and construction   of 
the factory. Just as a single brain plans the city  and the factory, so a sin- 
gle brain   directs  its  activity-from      the  factory's  office  and  from  the 
city's business center. The hierarchy   doesn't stop there.  The city  is the 
brain of the whole  society. "The great city commands everything: peace, 
war, work."27 Whether  it  is a matter  of  clothing,  philosophy,   technol- 
ogy, or taste, the great city  dominates  and colonizes the provinces:  the 
lines of influence  and command  are  exclusively from  the  center to the 
periphery.28 
     There is no ambiguity   to Le Corbusier's  view of how  authority  rela- 
tions should  be ordered:  hierarchy   prevails  in  every direction.   At the 
apex of the pyramid,  however, is not a capricious   autocrat but  rather  a 
modern  philosopher-king   who  applies  the  truths  of  scientific  under- 
standing for  the well-being  of all.29 It is true,  naturally,  that the  master 
planner, in  his not  infrequent  bouts of megalomania,   imagines that  he 
alone has a monopoly  on the truth.  In  a moment of personal  reflection 
in  The Radiant  City, for  example,  Le  Corbusier  declares:  "I  drew  up 
plans [for  Algiers], after  analyses, after calculations,  with  imagination, 
with  poetry.  The  plans were  prodigiously    true.  They were  incontro- 
vertible.  They  were breathtaking.   They  expressed all  the splendor   of 
modern times."30It  is not, however, the excess of pride that concerns us 
here but the  sort of implacable  authority   Le Corbusier  feels entitled  to 
claim  on behalf of  universal scientific   truths.  His high-modernist   faith 
is nowhere  so starkly-or      so ominously-expressed     as in  the follow- 
ing, which  I  quote at length: 

     The despot is not a man. It is the Plan. The correct, realistic, exact plan, 
     the one  that  will  provide  your  solution  once the  problem  has been 
     posited clearly, in  its entirety, in its  indispensable harmony. This plan 
     has been drawn up well away from the frenzy in the mayor's office or the 
     town hall, from  the cries of the electorate or the laments of society's vic- 
     tims. It  has been drawn up by serene and lucid minds. It has taken ac- 
     count of  nothing but human  truths.  It has ignored all  current  regula- 
     tions, all  existing usages, and channels. It has not considered whether 
     or not it  could be carried out with  the constitution now in  force. It is a 
     biological  creation destined for  human beings and capable of realiza- 
     tion by modern techniques.31 

130
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 1 13 


The wisdom of the plan sweeps away all social obstacles: the elected au- 
thorities,  the voting  public,  the constitution,  and  the legal structure.  At 
the very least, we are in the presence of a dictatorship  of the planner;  at 
most, we approach a cult of power  and remorselessness that is reminis- 
cent of fascist imagery.32 Despite the imagery, Le Corbusier sees himself 
as a technical  genius  and  demands power  in  the  name of  his  truths. 
Technocracy, in this  instance,  is the belief  that  the human  problem  of 
urban design has a unique  solution,  which  an expert  can discover  and 
execute. Deciding  such  technical   matters  by politics   and  bargaining 
would lead to the wrong  solution. As there is a single, true answer to the 
problem of planning  the modem  city, no compromises  are possible.33 
     Throughout   his career, Le Corbusier   is clearly  aware that  his kind 
of root-and-branch   urban  planning   requires  authoritarian    measures. 
'A Colbert  is required,"  he declares  to his French  reading  public  in  an 
early article  entitled  "Toward  a Machine  Age Paris."34 On the title page 
of his major  work,  one finds the words,  "This  work  is Dedicated to  Au- 
thority."  Much of  Le Corbusier's  career as a would-be  public  architect 
can be read as a quest for a "Prince"   (preferably  an authoritarian   one) 
who would  anoint  him  as the court's Colbert.  He  exhibited  designs for 
the League of  Nations,  lobbied the  Soviet elite  to accept  his new plan 
for Moscow,  and did what  he could to  get himself appointed  as regula- 
tor  of  planning   and zoning   for  the whole   of France  and  to  win  the 
adoption  of his  plan for  the new  Algiers.  Finally, under  the patronage 
of Jawaharlal   Nehru,   he built  a  provincial   capital   at Chandigarh   in 
India.   Although   Le  Corbusier's  own   political   affiliations    in  France 
were firmly   anchored  on the right,35 he would  clearly  have settled  for 
any state authority  that  would  give him  a free hand. He was appealing 
to logic  rather   than  politics  when  he wrote,   "Once his  [the  scientific 
planner's]  calculations  are  finished, he  is in a position  to  say-and    he 
does say: It shall  be thus!"36 
     What  captivated  Le  Corbusier  about  the Soviet  Union  was  not  so 
much its  ideology as the prospect  that a revolutionary,   high-modernist 
state might  prove hospitable  to  a visionary  planner.  After building   the 
headquarters  of  the  Central  Union  of  Consumer  Cooperatives  (Cen- 
trosoy~z),~'he   proposed,  in  plans prepared   in only  six  weeks, a vast 
design for the  rebuilding  of Moscow  in line  with  what he thought  were 
Soviet  aspirations  to create  an entirely  new  mode of living   in a class- 
less society. Having  seen Sergey Eisenstein's film  about  the peasantry 
and technology,  The General Line, Le Corbusier  was utterly  taken with 
its celebration  of tractors,  centrifuge  creamers,  and huge farms. He re- 
ferred  to it  often  in his  plan  to work  a comparable   transformation    of 
Russia's urban  landscape. 

131
114 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     Stalin's commissars  found his  plans for Moscow  as well as his proj- 
ect for the Palace of  Soviets too radical.38 The Soviet modernist  El Lis- 
sitzky attacked Le Corbusier's Moscow  as a "city of nowhere, . . . [a city] 
that  is neither  capitalist,   nor  proletarian,   nor  socialist,   . . . a  city  on 
paper, extraneous  to living  nature,  located  in  a desert through   which 
not even a river  must  be allowed  to pass (since a curve  would  contra- 
dict  the style)."39As  if to confirm  El  Lissitzky's  charge that  he had de- 
signed a "city  of  nowhere," Le  Corbusier  recycled  his design virtually 
intact-aside    from  removing  all references to Moscow-and    presented 
it as La ville  radieuse, suitable for central  Paris. 


The City as a Utopian Project 

     Believing  that  his revolutionary   urban  planning   expressed univer- 
sal scientific  truths,   Le Corbusier   naturally   assumed that  the public, 
once they understood  this logic,  would  embrace  his plan. The original 
manifesto  of CIAM called for primary   school  students to  be taught  the 
elementary principles   of scientific  housing:  the importance  of sunlight 
and fresh air  to health;  the rudiments   of electricity,  heat, lighting,   and 
sound; the right   principles  of  furniture   design; and so on.  These were 
matters of science, not  of taste; instruction   would create,  in time,  a cli- 
entele worthy  of the scientific  architect.  Whereas the scientific  forester 
could, as it were,  go right to work  on the forest  and shape it to his plan, 
the scientific   architect  was  obliged  to  first  train  a new  clientele  that 
would  "freely"  choose the urban life  that Le Corbusier  had planned  for 
them. 
     Any  architect,  I  imagine,  supposes that  the  dwellings  she designs 
will  contribute   to  her  clients'  happiness  rather  than  to  their  misery. 
The difference  lies in how the  architect  understands happiness.  For Le 
Corbusier, "human  happiness already exists expressed in terms of num- 
bers, of  mathematics,  of  properly  calculated   designs, plans  in which 
the cities  can already  be seen.'I4O He was certain, at least rhetorically, 
that  since his  city was  the rational   expression  of a machine-age  con- 
sciousness, modern man  would  embrace it ~holeheartedly.~~ 
     The kinds  of satisfactions  that  the citizen-subject  of  Le Corbusier's 
city  would  experience,  however,  were  not  the  pleasures  of personal 
freedom and autonomy. They were  the pleasures of fitting  logically  into 
a rational  plan:  "Authority  must now  step in, patriarchal   authority,  the 
authority   of  a father  concerned  for  his  children.   . .  . We must  build 
places where mankind  will  be reborn.  When the collective  functions  of 
the urban  community  have been organized,  then there  will  be individ- 
ual  liberty   for  all.  Each  man will   live  in  an  ordered  relation   to  the 

132
                                                                          The High-Modemist City I IS 


whole."42 In the Plan  Voisin  for  Paris, the  place of  each individual   in 
the great urban  hierarchy  is spatially  coded.  The business elite (indus- 
trials) will   live in  high-rise  apartments  at the core, while  the subaltern 
classes will  have small  garden apartments  at  the periphery.  One's sta- 
tus can be directly   read from  one's distance  from  the center. But,  like 
everyone in  a well-run  factory,  everyone in  the city  will  have the  "col- 
lective pride"   of a team of  workers  producing  a perfect  product.   "The 
worker  who  does  only  a part  of  the  job  understands  the  role  of  his 
labor; the  machines that  cover the  floor  of the factory  are examples to 
him of  power  and clarity,  and  make him part  of a work ofpe$ection   to 
which  his  simple  spirit  never dared to  aspire."43 Just as Le Corbusier 
was perhaps most famous for  asserting that  "the home is a machine for 
living,"  so he thought  of the  planned  city  as a large, efficient  machine 
with  many closely calibrated  parts.  He assumed, therefore, that the  cit- 
izens of his  city  would  accept, with   pride,  their  own  modest role  in a 
noble, scientifically   planned  urban  machine. 
     By his  own lights  Le Corbusier  was planning   for the basic  needs of 
his fellow   men-needs    that  were  ignored  or traduced   in the  existing 
city. Essentially,  he established them by stipulating   an abstract, simpli- 
fied human  subject  with  certain   material  and  physical  requirements. 
This schematic  subject needed so many  square meters of  living  space, 
so much fresh  air, so much  sunlight,  so much open space, so many es- 
sential  services.  At this  level,  he designed  a city  that  was  indeed far 
more  healthful   and functional   than  the crowded,   dark  slums against 
which  he railed.  Thus he spoke of  "punctual  and exact  respiration,"  of 
various  formulas  for  determining   optimal  sizes for apartments;  he  in- 
sisted on apartment  skyscrapers to  allow for  park space and, above all, 
for  efficient  traffic  circulation. 
     The Le  Corbusian  city was designed,  first  and foremost,  as a work- 
shop for  production.   Human  needs, in this  context, were  scientifically 
stipulated  by  the planner.  Nowhere  did  he admit  that the  subjects for 
whom  he was planning   might  have something  valuable  to say on  this 
matter  or  that  their  needs might  be plural  rather  than  singular.  Such 
was  his  concern  with   efficiency  that  he  treated  shopping   and meal 
preparation   as nuisances that would  be discharged  by central services 
like  those offered  by well-run   hotels.44 Although  floor  space was pro- 
vided  for  social activities,   he said almost  nothing  about the  actual  so- 
cial  and cultural   needs of the citizenry. 
      High modernism   implies,  as we have seen, a rejection of the past as 
a model to  improve  upon and a desire to make a completely  fresh start. 
The  more  utopian  the  high  modernism,   the  more thoroughgoing    its 
implied   critique  of  the existing  society. Some of the  most vituperative 

133
116 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


prose of The Radiant  City was directed  at  the misery, confusion,   "rot," 
"decay," "scum," and "refuse"  of the cities  that  Le Corbusier  wanted to 
transcend. The slums he showed in pictures were labeled "shabby" or, in 
the case of the French  capital,  "history,  historic  and  tubercular  Paris." 
He deplored  both the conditions   of the slums  and the people  they had 
created.  "How  many  of those five  million   [those  who  came from  the 
countryside to make their  fortune]  are simply  a dead weight on the city, 
an obstacle, a black clot of  misery, of failure,  of human  garbage?"45 
     His  objection  to the  slums was twofold.   First,  they  failed  aestheti- 
cally to  meet his standards  of discipline,  purpose,  and order.  "Is there 
anything,"  he asked rhetorically,    "more  pitiful   than  an undisciplined 
crowd?"  Nature,   he added,  is  "all  discipline"   and  will   "sweep  them 
away" even  if nature  operates  by a logic   "contrary  to  the interests  of 
mankind."46 Here he signals that the  founders  of the modern  city must 
be prepared to act ruthlessly.  The second danger of the slums was that, 
besides being noisy,  dangerous, dusty,  dark,  and disease-ridden,  they 
harbored  a potential  revolutionary    menace to the  authorities.   He un- 
derstood, as Haussmann had, that crowded  slums were and had always 
been an obstacle to efficient  police work.  Switching   back and forth  be- 
tween Louis XIV's Paris and imperial  Rome, Le Corbusier  wrote: "From 
the huddle  of  hovels,  from  the  depths  of grimy   lairs  (in  Rome-the 
Rome  of the  Caesars-the     plebes  lived  in  an  inextricable   chaos  of 
abutting  and warren-like   skyscrapers),  there  sometimes came the  hot 
gust of rebellion;   the plot  would  be hatched  in  the dark  recesses of an 
accumulated  chaos in  which  any kind  of police  activity  was extremely 
dificult.    . . . St. Paul of Tarsus was impossible to arrest while  he stayed 
in the  slums, and  the words  of his  Sermons were  passed like  wildfire 
from  mouth to  mouth."47 
     In  case they  were wondering,    Le Corbusier's  potential   bourgeois 
backers and  their  representatives   could  rest assured that  his  legible, 
geometric  city  would  facilitate  police  work.  Where  Haussmann  man- 
aged to retrofit  the  baroque city  of absolutism,  Le Corbusier  proposed 
to clear  the decks  completely  and replace  the  center  of Haussmann's 
city with  one built  with   control  and hierarchy  in  mind.48 


A Textbook Case of High-Modernist Architecture 

     Le  Corbusier's  intellectual  influence   on architecture   was out of  all 
proportion   to the actual  structures  he built.  Not even the Soviet  Union 
was quite up  to his sweeping ambition.   It is as an exemplar,  a textbook 
case, of the key elements of  high-modernist   planning-often      exagger- 
ated-that     he  belongs  in this   analysis.  His  commitment   to  what  he 

134
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 1 17 


called the "total  efficiency  and total rationalization"    of a new machine- 
age civilization   was  uncompr~mising.~~  Although   he was  obliged  to 
deal with nation-states,  his vision was universal. As he put it,  "city plan- 
ning everywhere, universal  city  planning,  total city                             His~lanning."~~ ac- 
tual plans  for Algiers,  Paris, and Rio  were, as we have seen, on a scale 
that was virtually   without   precedent.  Le Corbusier  was influenced,  as 
were others  of his generation,  by  the spectacle of  total  military   mobi- 
lization  in  World War  I.  "Let's make our  plans," he urged,  "plans  on a 
scale with   twentieth   century  events,  plans  equally  as big  as Satan's 
[war].  . . . Big!  Big!'I5' 
     The visual, aesthetic component of his bold plans was central.  Clean, 
smooth  lines  were  something   he  associated with   the  "all-business'' 
leanness of the machine.  He was positively   lyrical  about the  beauty of 
the machine  and its products.  And  houses, cities, and  agrovilles could 
also "emerge properly equipped, glitteringly   new, from the factory, from 
the workshop,  faultless products of smoothly  humming  machines."52 
     Integral,   finally, to  Le Corbusier's  ultramodernism   was his  repudi- 
ation  of tradition,   history, and  received taste. After  explaining  the  ori- 
gin of the traffic   congestion in  contemporary  Paris,  he warned against 
temptations  to  reform.  "We must  refuse  even the slightest  considera- 
tion  to what  is: to the  mess we are in  now." He emphasized,  "There  is 
no solution   to be  found  here."53 Instead, he insisted,  we  must  take a 
"blank  piece of paper," a "clean  tablecloth,"  and start  new calculations 
from  zero. It  was in this  context  that he was drawn   to the USSR and to 
the  ambitious   rulers   of  developing  countries.   There,  he  hoped,  he 
would  not be cramped  by the  "grotesquely inadequate  sites"  available 
in the  West, where  it was  possible to  practice  only  what  he called  an 
"orthopedic Thearchitect~ire."~~  long-established cities of the West, their 
traditions,   their  interest   groups,  their  slow-moving   institutions,    and 
their  complex  legal  and regulatory   structures  could  only  shackle  the 
dreams of a high-modernist   Gulliver. 


Brasilia:   The  High-Modernist     City  Built-Almost 

     Cities also believe they are the work of the mind or of chance, but neither the 
     one nor the other suffices to hold up their walls. 
     -1talo  Calvino, Invisible Cities 

No utopian  city gets built  precisely as designed by its prophet-architect. 
Just as the scientific  forester  is foiled  by the vagaries  of unpredictable 
nature  and by the divergent  purposes  of both his  employers  and those 
who have access to the forest,  so the urban planner  must contend  with 

135
118 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


the tastes and financial   means of his patrons  as well  as the resistance 
of builders,  workers,  and residents. Even  so, Brasilia  is about the clos- 
est thing we  have to a high-modernist   city,  having been built   more  or 
less along the lines  set out by Le Corbusier  and CIAM. Thanks to an ex- 
cellent book  by James Holston,   The Modernist  City: An Anthropologi- 
cal Critique  of Brasilia,55 it  is possible  to analyze both  the logic  of the 
plan for  Brasilia   and the  extent  of its  realization.   An appreciation   of 
the slippage  between  what  Brasilia   meant  for  its originators   on  one 
hand and  for  its residents  on  the other  will   in turn  pave  the way  (no 
pun intended)  for  Jane Jacob's thoroughgoing   critique   of modern  ur- 
ban planning. 
     The idea of a new  capital  in the interior   predates even the indepen- 
dence of BraziLS6 Its realization,   however,  was the pet  project  of Jus- 
celino  Kubitschek,   the  populist   president   from   1956 to   1961,  who 
promised Brazilians   "fifty  years of progress in five"  and a future of self- 
sustaining  economic   growth.  In   1957 Oscar  Niemeyer,  who  had  al- 
ready been named the chief  architect  for  public buildings   and housing 
prototypes, organized  a design competition   that was won,  on the basis 
of very  rough  sketches,  by Lucio   Costa. Costa's  idea-for     it  was  no 
more than that-was     of a "monumental  axis" to define the center  of the 
city, which  consisted of terraced embankments  describing  an arc inter- 
sected in its center  by a straight  avenue, and of a triangle  to  define the 
city's limits  (figure  18). 
     Both  architects  were  working   within  the  doctrines  of CIAM and Le 
Corbusier. Niemeyer,  a longtime  member  of the Brazilian   Communist 
Party, was also influenced  by  the Soviet version  of architectural    mod- 
ernism.  After  the design  competition,   construction   began almost  im- 
mediately  on an empty site on the Central  Plateau in the  state of Goiiis, 
nearly  1000 kilometers   from   Rio de Janeiro   and the  coast and  1620 
kilometers  from the  Pacific Ocean in the northeast. It  was indeed a new 
city  in the  wilderness.  No  "orthopedic"   compromises  were  necessary 
now  that the  planners  had, thanks  to  Kubitschek,  who made  Brasilia 
his top  priority,   a  "clean  tablecloth."  The state  planning  agency  con- 
trolled  all  the land  at the site,  so there were  no private-property   own- 
ers  with  whom   to  negotiate.   The city   was  then  designed  from  the 
ground  up, according  to an elaborate and unified  plan.  Housing, work, 
recreation,  traffic,   and public  administration    were each spatially  seg- 
regated  as Le  Corbusier  would   have  insisted.  Inasmuch  as  Brasilia 
was itself   a single-function,   strictly   administrative    capital,  the  plan- 
ning  itself was greatly  simplified. 

136
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 1 19 













                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         













18. The Costa plan of 1957, showing A, the Plaza of the Three Powers; B, the 
ministries; C, superquadra residential zones; D, the president's residence; and E, 
single-family housing 


Brasflia as the Negation (or Transcendence) of Brazil 

     Brasilia  was conceived of by Kubitschek  and by Costa and Niemeyer 
as a city of the future, a city of development, a realizable  utopia. It  made 
no reference to the habits, traditions,  and  practices of Brazil's  past or of 
its great cities, S5o Paulo, S5o Salvador, and Rio de Janeiro. As if to em- 
phasize the point,  Kubitschek  called  his own  residence  in Brasilia  the 
Dawn Palace. "What  else will  Brasilia  be," he asked, "if not the dawn of 
a new day for                            LikeBra~il?"~~ the Saint Petersburg of Peter the Great, 
Brasilia  was to be an exemplary  city, a center that would  transform  the 
lives of the Brazilians  who  lived there-from      their personal  habits and 
household organization  to their  social lives,  leisure, and work.  The goal 
of making  over Brazil   and Brazilians  necessarily  implied  a disdain  for 
what  Brazil  had been. In this  sense, the whole point  of the new  capital 
was to be a manifest contrast  to the  corruption,  backwardness,  and ig- 
norance  of the old Brazil. 

137
120 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     The great   crossroads  that  was  the plan's  point   of  departure  has 
been variously interpreted   as a symbol of Christ's cross or  an Amazon- 
ian bow.  Costa,  however,  referred  to  it  as a  "monumental   axis," the 
same term  that  Le Corbusier   used to describe  the  center  of many  of 
his urban plans.  Even if the  axis represented  a small attempt  to assim- 
ilate Brasilia   in  some way to  its national   tradition,   it remained   a city 
that could  have been  anywhere,  that provided   no clue  to its  own his- 
tory, unless that  history   was the modernist   doctrine  of  CIAM. It was a 
state-imposed city invented  to project  a new Brazil  to Brazilians  and to 
the world  at large. And  it was a state-imposed  city in  at least one other 
sense: inasmuch as it  was created to  be a city for  civil  servants,  many 
aspects of life that might  otherwise  have been left to the  private sphere 
were  minutely   organized,  from  domestic   and  residential   matters  to 
health services, education,  child  care,  recreation,  commercial   outlets, 
and so forth. 
     If  Brasilia  was to be Brazil's  urban  future,  what was  Brazil's  urban 
past and  present?  What,  precisely,  was  the new  capital   intended  to 
negate? A large part of the  answer can be inferred  from  Le Corbusier's 
second principle  of the new urbanism:  "the death of the street." Brasilia 
was designed to eliminate  the street and the square as places for public 
life. Although  the elimination   of local barrio  loyalties  and rivalries  may 
not have been planned, they were  also a casualty of the new city. 
     The  public   square  and  the  crowded   "corridor"    street  had  been 
venues of civic  life in  urban  Brazil  since colonial   days. As Holston  ex- 
plains, this  civic life  took two  forms.  In the first,  which  had been spon- 
sored by the church   or state, ceremonial   or patriotic   processions  and 
rituals were typically  held  in the principal  square of the town.58 The sec- 
ond form  encompassed a nearly inexhaustible  range of popular  uses of 
all the  town  squares. Children   might  play  there;  adults might   simply 
shop, stroll  and run into  acquaintances,  meet friends for  a meal or cof- 
fee, play cards or chess, enjoy the social  diversions of seeing and being 
seen. The point   is  that  the  square, as  a confluence   of streets  and  a 
sharply  enclosed,  framed  space,  become what  Holston   aptly  calls  a 
"public  visiting   room."59 As a public room, the  square is distinguished 
by its accessibility  to all social  classes and the great variety of activities 
it accommodates.  Barring  state proscriptions,   it is a flexible  space that 
enables those who use it to use it for  their mutual  purposes. The square 
or the busy street  attracts a crowd  precisely  because it provides an an- 
imated  scene-a    scene in  which   thousands  of unplanned,   informal, 
improvised  encounters  can  take place simultaneously.   The street was 
the  spatial  focus  for  public   life  outside  the  usually  cramped   family 
dwelling.60 The colloquialism for  "I'm  going downtown"  was "I'm  going 

138
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 121 

to the street." As the focus for sociability,  these spaces were also crucial 
sites for the  development  of public   opinion  as well  as for  "barrio   na- 
tionalism,"  which  could take institutional    form  in sports teams, bands, 
patron-saint  celebrations,   festival  groups,  and so on.  It  goes without 
saying that  the  street  or  the  public  square,  under  the  right   circum- 
stances, could also become the site of  public  demonstrations  and riots 
directed against  the state. 
     A mere  glance  at the  scenes of  Brasilia,  juxtaposed   to  the urban 
Brazil  that we  have been describing,  shows at once how  radical  is the 
transformation.   There  are no  streets in  the sense of public   gathering 
places; there  are  only  roads and  highways  to  be used exclusively   by 
motorized  traffic  (compare  figures  19 and 20). 
     There is  a square. But what  a square!  The vast, monumental  Plaza 
of the Three  Powers, flanked  by the  Esplanade of  the Ministries,   is of 
such a scale  as to dwarf  even  a military   parade  (compare  figures  21 
and 22, and figures 23 and 24). In  comparison,  Tiananmen Square  and 
the Red Square are positively cozy and intimate.  The plaza  is best seen, 
as are many  of Le Corbusier's   plans, from  the  air  (as in figure  24).  If 
one were to arrange  to meet a friend  there,  it would  be rather  like  try- 
ing to  meet someone in  the middle   of the Gobi  desert. And  if  one did 
meet up  with  one's friend,   there would   be nothing  to  do.  Functional 
simplification   demands that the rationale  for the  square as a public vis- 
iting  room be designed  out of Brasilia.   This plaza is  a symbolic center 
for the  state; the only activity   that goes on around  it  is the work  of the 
ministries.   Whereas the  vitality  of  the  older  square depended  on the 
mix of residence, commerce,  and administration   in  its catchment  area, 
those who  work  in  the  ministries  must  drive  to  their  residences  and 
then again to the separate commercial   centers of each residential  area. 
     One striking  result of Brasilia's  cityscape is that virtually   all the pub- 
lic  spaces in  the city  are  officially   designated  public  spaces: the  sta- 
dium, the theater, the concert hall,  the planned restaurants. The smaller, 
unstructured,   informal  public  spaces-sidewalk     cafes, street corners, 
small  parks,   neighborhood   squares-do     not  exist.   Paradoxically,  a 
great deal of nominally   open space characterizes this  city, as it does Le 
Corbusier's  city  plans.  But that  space tends  to be "dead"  space, as in 
the Plaza  of the Three  Powers. Holston  explains  this by  showing  how 
CIAM doctrines  create  sculptural   masses  widely   separated  by  large 
voids,  an  inversion   of  the  "figure-ground"    relations   in  older  cities. 
Given our  perceptual  habits, these voids  in the  modernist  city seem to 
be not  inviting    public  spaces  but  boundless,  empty  spaces that  are 
avoided.61 One could fairly  say that the effect of the  plan was to  design 
out  all  those unauthorized   locations   where  casual encounters   could 

139
                                                  [To view this image, refer to  
                                                  the print version of this title.] 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   












19.  Residential   street  in  the  neighborhood    Barra   Funda,  S5o  Paulo,  1988 













                                                 [To view this image, refer to  
                                                 the print version of this title.] 
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  









       20.   Residential    access way  Ll   in  Brasilia,    1980 

140
                                                  [To view this image, refer to  
                                                  the print version of this title.] 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   











2 1. Largo   do Pelourinho,    with   the  museum  of  the  city  and  the former    slave 
market,   S5o Salvador,   1980 












                                                 [To view this image, refer to  
                                                 the print version of this title.] 
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  










       22.  The  Plaza  of the  Three  Powers,  with   the  museum  of  the  city  and 
       Planalto   Palace,  Brasilia,    1980 

141
                                                 [To view this image, refer to  
                                                 the print version of this title.] 
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  











23.  The  Praca  de S6, S2o  Paulo,  1984 















                                                 [To view this image, refer to  
                                                 the print version of this title.] 
                                                  
                                                  
                                                  











24.  The  Plaza  of the  Three  Powers  and  the  Esplanade  of  the  Ministries,    Brasilia, 
1981 

142
                                                                          The High-Modemist City 125 


occur and crowds  could gather  spontaneously. The dispersal and  func- 
tional  segregation  meant  that  meeting  someone  virtually   required   a 
plan. 
     Costa  and Niemeyer   were  not  only  banishing  the  street  and  the 
square from  their  utopian  city. They believed  that  they were also ban- 
ishing  crowded  slums, with   their  darkness, disease, crime,  pollution, 
traffic jams  and noise,  and lack of  public  services. There were definite 
advantages to  beginning   with  an  empty, bulldozed   site belonging   to 
the state. At least the  problems  of land speculation,   rent gouging,  and 
property-based  inequalities  that beset most planners  could  be circum- 
vented. As with  Le  Corbusier  and  Haussmann,  there was an  emanci- 
pating vision  here. The best and most current  architectural   knowledge 
about sanitation,  education,  health, and recreation   could be made part 
of the  design. Twenty-five  square  meters  of green  space per resident 
reached the UNESCO-designed ideal. And as with any utopian plan,  the 
design of Brasilia  reflected  the social and political   commitments  of the 
builders  and their patron,  Kubitschek.  All residents  would have similar 
housing; the sole difference  would  be the number of units  they were al- 
lotted.  Following  the plans  of progressive  European  and Soviet  archi- 
tects, the  planners  of  Brasilia   grouped  the apartment   buildings   into 
what were  called superquadra  in order  to facilitate  the development  of 
a collective  life.  Each  superquadra  (roughly   360 apartments  housing 
1,500-2,500   residents)   had its  own  nursery  and  elementary  school; 
each grouping  of four  superquadra  had a secondary  school, a cinema, 
a social club,  sports facilities,   and a retail  sector. 
     Virtually   all the needs of Brasilia's  future residents  were reflected in 
the plan.  It  is just that  these needs were the  same abstract, schematic 
needs that produced  the formulas  for  Le Corbusier's plans. Although  it 
was surely  a rational,  healthy, rather  egalitarian,   state-created city,  its 
plans  made  not  the slightest   concession  to the  desires,  history,  and 
practices  of its residents. In  some important  respects, Brasilia  is to Siio 
Paulo  or  Rio  as  scientific  forestry   is  to  the unplanned   forest.   Both 
plans  are highly  legible,  planned  simplifications    devised to  create an 
efficient  order   that can  be monitored   and directed  from   above. Both 
plans,  as we shall  see, miscarry  in comparable  respects.  Finally,  both 
plans  change the city  and  the woods to  conform  to  the simple  grid  of 
the planner. 


Living  in Brasilia 

      Most  of those  who  have  moved to  Brasilia   from   other  cities  are 
amazed to  discover  "that it  is a city without   crowds."  People complain 

143
126 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


that Brasilia   lacks the bustle  of street  life,  that it  has none of the  busy 
street corners  and long  stretches of  storefront  facades that  animate  a 
sidewalk  for  pedestrians.  For  them,  it  is almost  as if  the founders  of 
Brasilia,  rather   than having  planned   a city, have  actually  planned  to 
prevent a city. The most  common way  they put  it is to say that Brasilia 
"lacks street corners,"  by which  they mean that it  lacks the complex  in- 
tersections of  dense neighborhoods  comprising  residences  and public 
cafes and  restaurants   with   places for   leisure,  work,   and  shopping. 
While  Brasilia   provides  well   for  some human  needs,  the  functional 
separation of work  from  residence and of both from  commerce  and en- 
tertainment,   the great voids  between superquadra,  and  a road system 
devoted exclusively to  motorized  traffic  make the disappearance  of the 
street  corner  a  foregone  conclusion.   The  plan  did   eliminate  traffic 
jams; it also eliminated   the welcome and  familiar  pedestrian  jams that 
one of Holston's  informants  called  "the point  of social  c~nviviality."~~ 
     The term brasilite,  meaning roughly  Brasil(ia)-itis,  which  was coined 
by the first-generation  residents,  nicely  captures the trauma  they expe- 
                      a Asrien~ed.~~ mock clinical condition, it connotes a rejection of the 
standardization   and anonymity   of life  in  Brasilia.   "They use the term 
brasilite  to  refer  to their   feelings  about  a daily  life  without   the plea- 
sures-the    distractions,   conversations,   flirtations,   and little  rituals- 
of outdoor  life  in  other Brazilian   cities."64 Meeting someone normally 
requires  seeing them  either at  their  apartment  or  at work.  Even if  we 
allow  for the initial   simplifying   premise of Brasilia's  being  an adminis- 
trative  city, there  is nonetheless  a bland  anonymity  built  into  the very 
structure  of the capital.  The population   simply lacks  the small accessi- 
ble  spaces that they  could  colonize  and  stamp  with  the  character  of 
their  activity,  as they have  done historically   in  Rio  and S5o Paulo. To 
be sure,  the inhabitants   of Brasilia   haven't  had much  time  to modify 
the city  through  their  practices,  but the  city is designed to be fairly  re- 
calcitrant   to their  efforts.65 
      "Brasilite,"  as a term,  also underscores  how the  built  environment 
affects  those who dwell   in it.  Compared  to  life in  Rio  and S5o Paulo, 
with  their  color  and  variety, the  daily  round  in bland,  repetitive,   aus- 
tere  Brasilia  must  have resembled  life  in  a sensory deprivation   tank. 
The recipe  for high-modernist   urban  planning,   while  it may  have cre- 
ated formal   order  and  functional   segregation,  did  so at the  cost of  a 
sensorily  impoverished   and  monotonous   environment-an      environ- 
ment  that inevitably  took  its toll  on the  spirits of  its residents. 
     The anonymity  induced  by Brasilia  is evident from  the scale and ex- 
terior   of the  apartments   that  typically   make up  each  residential  su- 
perquadra   (compare  figures  25 and  26).  For superquadra   residents, 

144
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 127 


the two  most frequent  complaints   are the  sameness of the apartment 
blocks and  the isolation   of the  residences  ("In  Brasilia,   there  is only 
house and work").66 The facade of each block  is strictly  geometric  and 
egalitarian.  Nothing   distinguishes  the exterior  of  one apartment  from 
another;  there  are  not  even balconies  that  would   allow  residents  to 
add distinctive   touches and  create semipublic   spaces. Part of the  dis- 
orientation   arises from  the fact  that  apartment  dwelling-especially, 
perhaps, this  form of  apartment  dwelling-fails      to accord  with deeply 
embedded conceptions   of home.  Holston   asked a class of  nine-year- 
old children,   most of whom  lived  in superquadra,  to draw  a picture  of 
"home." Not  one drew an apartment  building   of any kind.  All  drew, in- 
stead, a traditional   freestanding   house with  windows,  a central   door, 
and a pitched   roof.67 The superquadra  blocks,  by contrast,   resist the 
stamp of individuality,    while the  glass walls on their  exteriors  infringe 
on the sense of private  space in  the home.68 Concerned with  the over- 
all  aesthetic  of the  plan,  the  architects   erased not  only  the  external 
display  of status distinctions   but also much  of the visual  play of differ- 
ence. Just  as the  general  design  of the  city  militates   against  an  au- 
tonomous  public   life,  so  the  design  of the  residential   city   militates 
against individuality. 
     The disorienting   quality  of  Brasilia  is exacerbated by  architectural 
repetition  and uniformity.   Here is a case where what seems like ration- 
ality  and legibility   to  those working   in administration    and urban  ser- 
vices  seems like  mystifying   disorder  for  the  ordinary   residents  who 
must navigate  the city.  Brasilia  has few  landmarks.  Each  commercial 
quarter  or  superquadra  cluster  looks  roughly  like  any other.  The sec- 
tors of  the city are  designated by an elaborate  set of acronyms  and ab- 
breviations  that are nearly  impossible to master,  except from the global 
logic  of the center.  Holston  notes the irony  between  macro-order   and 
micro-confusion:   "Thus, while  the topologies  of total  order produce  an 
unusual,  abstract  awareness  of  the plan,  practical   knowledge  of  the 
city  actually  decreases with the  imposition  of  systematic rati~nality."~~ 
From  the perspective  of  the planners  of  a utopian  city,  whose goal  is 
more to  change the world  than to  accommodate it,  however, the shock 
and disorientation    occasioned by life  in  Brasilia  may  be part of  its di- 
dactic  purpose.   A  city  that  merely   pandered  to  existing   tastes and 
habits would   not be doing  its utopian  job. 


Unplanned Brasilia 

     From  the  beginning,  Brasilia   failed  to go precisely  as planned.  Its 
master  builders  were  designing  for  a new Brazil   and for  new  Brazil- 

145
                                          [To view this image, refer to  
                                          the print version of this title.] 
                                           
                                           
                                           






25.  Residential   area  along   Rua Tiradentes   in  Ouro  Preto,   1980 
























                                           [To view this image, refer to  
                                           the print version of this title.] 
                                            
                                            
                                            





















         26.   A superquadra    apartment   block   in  Brasilia,    1980 

146
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 129 


ians-orderly,    modern,  efficient,  and under their  discipline.   They were 
thwarted  by contemporary   Brazilians   with  different  interests  and the 
determination  to  have them heard.  Somehow, it was  assumed that the 
huge workforce   (more than  sixty  thousand  strong)  would  respond  to 
the call to  build  the city and  then quietly  leave it to  the administrators 
for whom  it  was  intended.  The construction   workers,  moreover,   had 
not been adequately  planned  for. Kubitschek  accorded  top  priority   to 
finishing  Brasilia   as quickly  as possible.  Although  most  construction 
laborers routinely  worked  overtime,  the population   at the building  site 
quickly  outstripped   the  temporary   housing  allotted  to  them  in  what 
was called  the  Free  City. They  soon squatted  on  additional   land   on 
which  they built  makeshift  houses; in  cases where whole  families  mi- 
grated  to  Brasilia   (or  farmed   there),  the  houses they  erected  were 
sometimes quite  substantial. 
     The "pioneers"  of  Brasilia  were collectively   called "bandeirantes  of 
the twentieth   century," after the  adventurers  who  had first  penetrated 
the interior.  The label was intended  as a compliment,  inasmuch  as Ku- 
bitschek's Brasilia  was also a symbolic  conquest of the interior   in a na- 
tion that  had historically  clung  to the shoreline.  At the outset, however, 
the manual laborers  attracted  to Brasilia  were derogatorily   called can- 
dangos. A candango was  "a man  without  qualities,  without   culture,   a 
vagabond, lower-class,  10wbrow."~O Kubitschek changed that. He used 
the building    of  Brasilia,   which  was,  after  all,   devised to  transform 
Brazil,  in order  to transform  the candangos into  the proletarian  heroes 
of the  new  nation.  "Future  interpreters   of  Brazilian   Civilization,"    he 
declared,  "must dwell  with  astonishment  before  the bronzed  rigors  of 
this anonymous  titan,  who  is the candango,  the obscure  and formida- 
ble hero of the  construction  of Brasilia.   . . . While the skeptics  laughed 
at the intended  utopia of  the new city that  I prepared  to build,  the can- 
dangos shouldered   the re~ponsibility."~~Taking   full  advantage  of  the 
rhetorical  space thus provided  them, the candangos  insisted on having 
their  own  patch  of  the  utopian  city.  They  organized  to  defend  their 
land,  to demand  urban   services, and  to  be given  secure title.   In  the 
end, by  1980, 75 percent  of  the population   of Brasilia   lived  in  settle- 
ments  that  had  never  been anticipated,   while   the  planned  city  had 
reached less than half  of its projected  population   of 557,000. The foot- 
hold the poor  gained in Brasilia  was  not just a result of the beneficence 
of Kubitschek  and his wife,  Dona Sara. Political   structure  played a key 
role as well.  Squatters  were able to mobilize,   protest, and be heard  by 
virtue  of a reasonably competitive  political   system. Neither Kubitschek 
nor other  politicians   could possibly  ignore the opportunity   to cultivate 
a political  clientele  who  might  vote as a bloc. 

147
130 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     The unplanned   Brasilia-that      is,  the real,  existing  Brasilia-was 
quite different  from  the  original  vision.  Instead of  a classless adminis- 
trative city,  it was a city  marked by stark  spatial  segregation according 
to social class. The poor lived on the periphery  and commuted  long dis- 
tances to the  center, where  much of  the elite  lived and  worked.  Many 
of the  rich  also created  their  own  settlements with   individual   houses 
and private  clubs, thereby  replicating  the  affluent lifestyles  found else- 
where in  Brazil.  The unplanned  Brasilias-that      of the rich  and that  of 
the poor-were      not  merely  a footnote  or  an accident;  one could  say 
that the cost of this  kind  of order and legibility   at the center of  the plan 
virtually   required  that  it be sustained  by an unplanned  Brasilia  at  the 
margins. The two Brasilias  were not just  different;  they were symbiotic. 
     Radically  transforming    an entire  nation  of Brazil's   size and diver- 
sity-let      alone  in  only  five  years-was      all  but  inconceivable.   One 
senses that Kubitschek, like  many rulers  with  great ambitions  for  their 
countries,  despaired of  a direct assault  on a11 Brazil and all Brazilians 
and turned  to the  more plausible  task  of creating  from  zero a utopian 
model. Raised  on a new site,  in a new  place, the city  would  provide  a 
transforming   physical   environment   for   its new  residents-an      envi- 
ronment  minutely  tailored   to the latest  dictates regarding  health,  effi- 
ciency, and rational  order.  As the progressive city  would  evolve from a 
unitary,  integrated   plan on  land  owned  entirely  by the  state, with  all 
contracts,  commercial   licenses,  and zoning  in  the hands of  the plan- 
ning agency (Novacap),  the conditions  seemed favorable for  a success- 
ful  "utopian  miniaturization." 
     How  successful was Brasilia  as a high-modernist,  utopian  space? If 
we judge it by the  degree to which it  departs from  cities in  older, urban 
Brazil,  then its  success was considerable. If  we judge it  by its capacity 
either to transform   the rest of Brazil  or to inspire  a love of the new way 
of life, then its success was minimal. The real Brasilia,  as opposed to the 
hypothetical  Brasilia  in the planning  documents, was greatly marked by 
resistance, subversion,  and political   calculation. 


Le Corbusier   at  Chandigarh 

Since  Le Corbusier  did  not  design Brasilia,   it  may seem like  guilt  by 
association to  blame him  for  its manifest  failings.  Two considerations, 
however, justify  the connection.  The first  is that  Brasilia  was faithfully 
built  according   to CIAM doctrines elaborated  mostly  by Le  Corbusier. 
Second,  Le Corbusier   did  in  fact play  a major   role  in  designing  an- 
other capital  city  that reflected  precisely  the human problems  encoun- 
tered in  Brasilia. 

148
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 13 1 











                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         










27. The chowk, or piazza, that Le Corbusier designed for Chandigarh's city center 


     Chandigarh,  the new  capital  of the Punjab,  was half planned  when 
the architect  in  charge, Matthew   Nowicki,   suddenly died.72 Nehru,  in 
search of a successor, invited  Le Corbusier  to finish  the design and su- 
pervise the construction.   The choice was  in keeping with  Nehru's  own 
high-modernist  purpose:  namely, the promotion   of modern technology 
in a new  capital  that would   dramatize  the values  that the  new Indian 
elite wished to  convey.73 Le Corbusier's modifications  of Nowicki's  and 
Albert  Mayer's original   plan were  all  in the  direction  of  monumental- 
ism and  linearity.   In  place  of large  curves,  Le  Corbusier  substituted 
rectilinear   axes. At the center of the  capital,  he inserted  a huge monu- 
mental  axis not  unlike  those in  Brasilia  and  in his  plan for  Paris.74 In 
place of crowded  bazaars cramming  as many goods and people as pos- 
sible into  small  spaces, he substituted   huge squares  that  today stand 
largely  empty (figure  27). 
     Whereas  road  crossings   in  India   had  typically   served  as public 
gathering  places, Le Corbusier  shifted  the scale and arranged  the zon- 
ing in  order to  prevent  animated street  scenes from developing.  Notes 
one  recent  observer:  "On  the  ground,  the  scale  is  so large  and  the 
width  between  meeting streets so great  that  one sees nothing but  vast 
stretches  of concrete  paving  with   a few  lone  figures  here and  there. 
The small-scale  street trader,  the hawker  or  the rehris  (barrows)  have 

149
132 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


been banned from  the city  center, so that even where  sources of inter- 
est and activity  could be included,   if only  to reduce the concreted  bar- 
renness and authority  of  the chowk, these are not ~tilized."~5 
     As in Brasilia,   the effort  was to transcend  India  as it existed and  to 
present Chandigarh's citizens-largely     administrators-with       an image 
of their  own future.  As in  Brasilia,  the upshot  was another  unplanned 
city  at the periphery   and the  margins,  one that  contradicted   the aus- 
tere order  at the center. 


The Case Against   High-Modernist     Urbanism:   Jane Jacobs 

Jane Jacobs's book  The Death and  Life  of Great American   Cities was 
written   in   1961 against  a  high  tide  of  modernist,   functional   urban 
planning.  Hers  was by no  means the first  criticism   of high-modernist 
urbanism,  but  it was, I  believe, the  most carefully  observed  and intel- 
lectually  grounded  critique.76 As the most comprehensive  challenge to 
contemporary   doctrines   of urban  planning,   it  sparked  a debate,  the 
reverberations   of  which   are  still  being  felt.   The result,   some three 
decades later, has been that many of Jacobs's views have been incorpo- 
rated  into   the  working   assumptions  of  today's  urban   planners.   Al- 
though  what  she called  her  "attack  on  current  city  planning   and  re- 
building"   was concerned  primarily    with  American  cities,  she located 
Le Corbusier's  doctrines,  as applied abroad  and at home, at the  center 
of her field  of fire. 
     What  is remarkable  and telling  about  Jacobs's critique is  its unique 
perspective.  She begins at street  level, with  an ethnography   of micro- 
order  in  neighborhoods,  sidewalks,  and intersections.   Where Le  Cor- 
busier  "sees" his  city  initially   from   the  air, Jacobs  sees her city  as a 
pedestrian  on her daily  rounds  would. Jacobs was also a political   acti- 
vist involved  in many campaigns  against proposals for  zoning changes, 
road building,   and housing development  that  she thought ill-advised.77 
It  was  all but  inconceivable   that  a radical  critique,   grounded   in this 
fashion,  could  ever have originated  from  within   the intellectual   circle 
of urban  planners.78 Her novel  brand  of everyday urban  sociology  ap- 
plied  to  the design  of cities  was simply  too  far  removed  from  the or- 
thodox  educational   routines  of urban  planning   schools  at the time.79 
An examination   of  her critique   from  the margins   serves to underline 
many  of the failings  of high  modernism. 

150
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 133 


Visual Order Versus Experienced Order 

     A formative   insight  in Jacobs's argument  is  that there  is no neces- 
sary correspondence  between the tidy  look  of geometric  order  on one 
hand and  systems that effectively  meet  daily  needs on the other.  Why 
should we  expect, she asks, that  well-functioning    built  environments 
or social  arrangements  will  satisfy  purely  visual  notions  of order  and 
regularity?  To illustrate   the  conundrum,   she refers to  a new  housing 
project in  East Harlem that  sported, conspicuously, a rectangular  lawn. 
The lawn  was the object  of  general contempt  by  the residents.  It  was 
even taken as an insult  by  those who  had been forcibly   relocated  and 
now lived  in a project  among  strangers where  it was impossible  to get 
a newspaper or  a cup of coffee or to  borrow  fifty  cents.80 The apparent 
order of  the lawn seemed cruelly  emblematic  of a more  keenly felt dis- 
order. 
     A fundamental   mistake  that  urban  planners  made, Jacobs claims, 
was to infer  functional   order  from  the duplication   and  regimentation 
of building   forms: that  is, from  purely  visual  order. Most  complex sys- 
tems, on the  contrary,  do not  display  a surface regularity;   their  order 
must be sought at a deeper level. "To see complex systems of functional 
order as order, and not  as chaos, takes understanding. The leaves drop- 
ping from  the  trees in  the autumn,  the  interior   of an airplane  engine, 
the entrails   of a rabbit,  the  city  desk of a newspaper,  all appear  to be 
chaos if  they are seen without   comprehension.   Once they are seen as 
systems of order,  they  actually  look  different."  At  this level  one could 
say that Jacobs was a "functionalist,"   a word  whose use was banned in 
Le  Corbusier's  studio.  She  asked, What  function   does this  structure 
serve, and  how  well  does it  serve it?  The "order"   of a thing   is deter- 
mined by the  purpose it serves, not by a purely  aesthetic view of its sur- 
face order.81 Le Corbusier, by contrast,  seemed to have firmly  believed 
that  the most efficient  forms  would  always have a classical  clarity  and 
order. The physical  environments  Le Corbusier designed and built  had, 
as did  Brasilia,   an  overall  harmony   and  simplicity   of  form.  For  the 
most part,  however, they failed  in important   ways as places where peo- 
ple would  want  to live  and work. 
      It  was this  failure   of  the general   urban  planning   models  that  so 
preoccupied   Jacobs. The planners'  conception  of a city  accorded  nei- 
ther  with  the  actual  economic  and  social functions   of an  urban  area 
nor  with  the (not  unrelated)  individual    needs of its inhabitants.   Their 
most  fundamental    error  was  their   entirely   aesthetic  view  of  order. 
This  error  drove them  to the further   error  of rigidly   segregating  func- 

151
134 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


tions. In  their eyes, mixed uses of real estate-say,    stores intermingled 
with   apartments,   small  workshops,   restaurants,    and  public   build- 
ings-created     a kind  of visual  disorder   and confusion.  The great  ad- 
vantage  of single  uses-one     shopping   area, one  residential   area- 
was that  it  made possible  the monofunctional    uniformity    and visual 
regimentation    that  they  sought.   As a  planning    exercise,  it  was  of 
course vastly  easier  to plan  an  area zoned  for  a single  use than  one 
zoned for several.  Minimizing   the number  of uses and hence the num- 
ber of variables   to be juggled  thus  combined  with   an aesthetic  of vi- 
sual  order  to  argue  for  a  single-use  doctrineea2 The metaphor   that 
comes to mind  in  this connection   is that  of an  army drawn   up on the 
parade  ground  as opposed  to  an army   engaged in  combat  with   the 
enemy. In  the  first   case is  a tidy  visual   order  created  by  units  and 
ranks drawn   up in  straight  lines.  But  it is  an army  doing  nothing,  an 
army  on  display. An  army  at  war  will   not  display  the  same orderly 
arrangement,  but  it  will  be, in  Jacobs's terms,  an army  doing what  it 
was trained  to do. Jacobs thinks  she knows  the roots  of this  penchant 
for  abstract,   geometric   order   from  above:  "Indirectly     through   the 
utopian  tradition,   and  directly  through   the more  realistic  doctrine   of 
art by  imposition,   modern  city  planning   has been burdened  from   its 
beginnings  with   the  unsuitable   aim  of  converting    cities  into  disci- 
plined  works  of art.''83 
     Recently, Jacobs notes,  the statistical  techniques  and  input-output 
models available  to planners had  become far more  sophisticated. They 
were encouraged  to attempt  such  ambitious  feats of planning  as mas- 
sive slum  clearance now  that  they could  closely calculate  the  budget, 
materials,  space,  energy, and transportation    needs of  a rebuilt   area. 
These plans  continued  to  ignore  the  social  costs  of moving  families 
"like  grains  of  sand, or  electrons,  or billiard    balls.''84 The plans were 
also based on notoriously  shaky assumptions, and they treated  systems 
of  complex  order  as  if  they  could  be  simplified   by  numerical   tech- 
niques,  regarding   shopping,  for  example,  as a  purely  mathematical 
issue involving  square footage  for shopping  space and traffic  manage- 
ment  as an issue  of moving   a certain   number  of vehicles  in  a  given 
time along  a certain number  of streets of  a given width.  These were in- 
deed formidable   technical  problems,  but,  as we shall  see, the real  is- 
sues involved much  more besides. 


The Functional Superiority of Cross-Use and Complexity 

     The establishment   and maintenance   of social  order  in large  cities 
are,  as we have increasingly   learned,   fragile  achievements.  Jacobs's 

152
                                                                          The High-Modemist City 13 5 


view of  social order  is both  subtle  and instructive.   Social order   is not 
the result   of the  architectural    order  created  by  T squares  and  slide 
rules. Nor  is  social order  brought   about by  such professionals  as po- 
licemen,  nightwatchmen,    and  public  officials.   Instead,  says Jacobs, 
"the  public   peace-the     sidewalk  and  street  peace-of     cities   . . .  is 
kept by an intricate,   almost unconscious network  of voluntary   controls 
and standards  among the people themselves,  and enforced by the peo- 
ple themselves." The  necessary conditions  for  a safe street are  a clear 
demarcation   between  public   space and  private  space,  a substantial 
number  of people who  are watching  the street on and  off ("eyes on the 
street"),  and fairly  continual,   heavy use, which  adds to the quantity   of 
eyes on the  street.85 Her example  of  an area  where  these conditions 
were met  is Boston's North  End. Its  streets were thronged  with  pedes- 
trians  throughout  the day owing  to the density of convenience  and gro- 
cery stores, bars, restaurants,  bakeries, and  other shops. It was a place 
where  people came  to shop  and stroll   and to  watch  others  shop and 
stroll.  The  shopkeepers had  the  most direct   interest  in  watching  the 
sidewalk:  they  knew  many  people  by name,  they were  there  all  day, 
and their  businesses depended on the neighborhood  traffic.  Those who 
came and went  on errands  or to eat or  drink  also provided  eyes on the 
street,  as did  the  elderly  who  watched  the  passing  scene from  their 
apartment   windows.   Few  of these  people  were  friends,   but  a good 
many were  acquaintances who  did recognize  one another. The process 
is powerfully   cumulative.  The more animated  and busier the street, the 
more  interesting  it is  to watch and  observe; all these unpaid  observers 
who  have some familiarity   with  the  neighborhood  provide  willing,   in- 
formed  surveillance. 
     Jacobs  recounts  a revealing  incident   that occurred   on her  mixed- 
use street in  Manhattan  when  an older man  seemed to be trying  to ca- 
jole  an eight-  or nine-year-old   girl  to go with  him.  As Jacobs watched 
this  from her  second-floor window,  wondering   if she should intervene, 
the  butcher's  wife  appeared on  the sidewalk,   as did the  owner  of the 
deli,  two  patrons  of a bar, a fruit   vendor, and  a laundryman,   and sev- 
eral  other people watched  openly from  their  tenement windows,  ready 
to  frustrate  a possible  abduction.  No  "peace officer"  appeared  or was 
necessarya6 
      Another  instance  of informal   urban  order  and  services is  instruc- 
tive.  Jacobs explains that when a friend  used their apartment  while  she 
and  her husband were  away or  when they  didn't  want to  wait up  for a 
late-arriving    visitor,  they would  leave the  key to their  apartment   with 
the  deli owner,  who  had a special  drawer  for such  keys and who  held 
them  for the friends.87 She noted that every nearby mixed-use street had 

153
136 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


someone who played  the same role:  a grocer, candy-store  owner, bar- 
ber, butcher, dry  cleaner, or  bookshop  owner. This  is one of the  many 
public functions  of private  business.88 These services, Jacobs notes, are 
not the outgrowth   of any deep friendship;  they  are the result  of people 
being on  what  she calls  "sidewalk  terms"  with   others. And  these are 
services that  could  not  plausibly  be provided   by a public   institution. 
Having  no recourse  to the face-to-face  politics  of  personal reputation 
that underwrites   social  order  in small  rural  communities,   the city  re- 
lies on the  density  of people who  are on  sidewalk  terms  with  one an- 
other to  maintain   a modicum   of public  order.  The web  of familiarity 
and acquaintanceship  enabled a host of crucial  but  often invisible  pub- 
lic  amenities.  A  person  didn't  think   twice   about  asking  someone to 
hold one's seat at the theater, to watch a child while one goes to the rest- 
room,  or to keep an  eye on a bike while  one ducks  into a  deli to buy  a 
sandwich. 
     Jacobs's analysis is notable for its  attention  to the microsociology  of 
public order.  The agents of this order are all  nonspecialists whose main 
business is something else. There are no formal  public  or voluntary  or- 
ganizations   of  urban  order   here-no     police,   no  private   guards  or 
neighborhood  watch, no  formal  meetings or officeholders.  Instead, the 
order  is embedded in  the logic  of daily  practice.  What's  more,  Jacobs 
argues, the  formal   public  institutions    of  order  function   successfully 
only when  they  are undergirded   by this  rich,  informal   public  life.  An 
urban  space where  the  police  are  the  sole agents  of order   is a very 
dangerous  place.  Jacobs admits  that  each of  the small   exchanges of 
informal  public  life-nodding      hello,  admiring  a newborn  baby, asking 
where  someone's nice pears come  from-can     be seen as trivial.   "But 
the sum is not  trivial   at all," she insists.  "The sum of each  casual, pub- 
lic  contact at  a local level-most     of  it fortuitous,   most of  it associated 
with  errands,  all of it  metered by the  person concerned  and not  thrust 
upon  him by  anyone-is     a feeling  for the  public  identity   of people,  a 
web of public   respect and trust,  and  a resource in  time of  personal or 
neighborhood   need. The  absence of  this  trust  is  a disaster  to  a  city 
street. Its  cultivation   cannot be  institutionalized.   And  above all, it  im- 
plies no private   commitment^."^^ Where Le  Corbusier  began with   for- 
mal,  architectural   order  from  above, Jacobs begins with  informal,   so- 
cial  order from  below. 
     Diversity,  cross-use, and complexity   (both social  and architectural) 
are  Jacobs's watchwords.  The  mingling   of residences  with   shopping 
areas and workplaces   makes a neighborhood   more  interesting,  more 
convenient,   and more  desirable-qualities      that  draw   the foot  traffic 

154
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 137 


that in turn  makes the streets relatively safe. The whole logic of her case 
depends on the creation of the crowds, diversity,  and conveniences that 
define a setting  where people  will  want  to be. In  addition,   a high  vol- 
ume of foot  traffic  stimulated   by an  animated  and colorful   neighbor- 
hood has economic  effects  on commerce  and property   values, which 
are hardly trivial.   The popularity  of  a district  and its economic  success 
go hand in  hand. Once created,  such places will   attract  activities  that 
most planners   would   have specially   sequestered elsewhere.   Rather 
than play  in  the large  parks  created for  that  purpose,  many  children 
prefer the  sidewalks, which  are safer, more  eventful,  and more  conve- 
nient to the comforts  available  in  stores and at home.90 Understanding 
the magnetic  effect of the busy street  over more  specialized  settings is 
no more  difficult   than understanding   why  the kitchen  is  typically  the 
busiest room  in  a  house. It  is  the most  versatile  setting-a      place of 
food and drink,   of cooking  and eating,  and hence of  socialization  and 
exchange.91 
     What are the conditions   of this diversity?  That a district  have mixed 
primary   uses, Jacobs  suggests, is the  most  vital   factor.  Streets  and 
blocks should be short in order  to avoid creating  long barriers  to pedes- 
trians  and commerce.92 Buildings  should  ideally be  of greatly  varying 
age and condition,  thereby  making  possible different  rental  terms  and 
the varied uses that accompany them. Each of these conditions, not  sur- 
prisingly,  violates one or more  of the working  assumptions  of orthodox 
urban planners  of the  day: single-use districts,  long  streets, and archi- 
tectural  uniformity.  Mixed  primary  uses, Jacobs explains, are synergis- 
tic with  diversity   and density. 
     Take, for  example, a small  restaurant  in  a single-use district-say, 
the financial   district  of Wall  Street.  Such a restaurant  must  make vir- 
tually  all  its  profit  between  10 A.M. and 3 P.M., the hours  when  office 
workers  take their  midmorning   coffee breaks and lunch  breaks before 
commuting   home at  the end  of the  day, leaving  the street  silent.  The 
restaurant   in  a mixed-use  district,   on  the  other  hand,  has potential 
clients passing  by throughout  the day  and into  the night.  It may  there- 
fore stay open for  more hours,  benefiting  not only  its own business but 
also that  of  nearby  specialized  shops,  which  might  be  economically 
marginal  in  a single-use district   but which   become going  concerns in 
a lively  mixed-use  area. The  very jumble   of activities,   buildings,   and 
people-the     apparent  disorder  that  offended  the aesthetic  eye of  the 
planner-was      for Jacobs the sign  of dynamic  vitality:   "Intricate   min- 
gling~of   different  uses are  not a form  of  chaos. On the  contrary  they 
represent  a complex and highly  developed  form  of order."93 

155
138 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     While  Jacobs makes a convincing  case for mixed  use and complex- 
ity by examining   the micro-origins    of public   safety, civic trust,   visual 
interest,  and convenience,  there  is a larger   argument  to be made  for 
cross-use and diversity. Like  the diverse old-growth   forest, a richly  dif- 
ferentiated  neighborhood   with   many  kinds   of shops,  entertainment 
centers, services,  housing  options,  and  public   spaces is, virtually   by 
definition,  a more  resilient  and  durable  neighborhood.  Economically, 
the diversity  of its commercial   "bets"  (everything  from funeral  parlors 
and public  services to grocery stores and bars) makes it less vulnerable 
to economic  downturns.   At the same time  its diversity  provides  many 
opportunities   for   economic   growth   in  upturns.   Like  monocropped 
forests, single-purpose   districts,   although   they may  initially    catch  a 
boom, are especially susceptible  to stress. The diverse neighborhood  is 
more sustainable. 
     I think  that  a "woman's  eye," for lack of a better  term, was essential 
to Jacobs's frame of reference.  A good many  men, to  be sure, were in- 
sightful  critics  of high-modernist   urban planning,   and Jacobs refers to 
many of  their  writings.   Nevertheless,  it  is difficult   to imagine  her  ar- 
gument being  made in quite  the same way by a man. Several  elements 
of her critique  reinforce  this  impression.  First, she experiences the city 
as far more  than a setting  for  the daily  trek  to and from  work  and  the 
acquisition   of goods  and services.  The eyes with   which  she sees the 
street are, by turns,  those of shoppers running   errands, mothers  push- 
ing baby carriages,  children   playing,  friends  having coffee or  a bite to 
eat, lovers strolling,   people  looking  from  their  windows,  shopkeepers 
dealing  with  customers,  old people  sitting  on park  benches.94 Work is 
not absent  from  her  account, but  her  attention  is  riveted  on the quo- 
tidian  in  the street  as it appears  around  work  and  outside of work.   A 
concern  with  public  space puts both  the  interior  of  the home  and the 
office as factory outside  her purview.  The activities that  she observes so 
carefully,  from  taking  a walk  to  window-shopping,   are  largely  activi- 
ties that  do not  have a single  purpose  or that  have no  conscious pur- 
pose in the narrow   sense. 
     Compare  this  perspective  with   most  of the  key elements  in high- 
modernist   urban  planning.   Such plans  all  but  require  forms  of  sim- 
plification   that  strip   human  activity  to  a  sharply  defined  single pur- 
pose. In  orthodox   planning,   such  simplifications    underlie  the  strict 
functional   segregation   of work   from   domicile   and  both  from  com- 
merce.  The matter  of  transportation    becomes, for  Le  Corbusier  and 
others, the single  problem  of how to  transport  people (usually  in auto- 
mobiles) as quickly  and economically   as possible. The activity of  shop- 
ping becomes a question  of providing   adequate floor space and access 

156
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 139 


for a certain  quantity  of  shoppers and goods. Even  the category of  en- 
tertainment   was split  up  into  specified activities   and segregated  into 
playgrounds,  athletic  fields, theaters,  and so on. 
     Thus, the  second result of  Jacobs's having a woman's eye is her  re- 
alization  that  a great deal  of human  activity  (including,   by all  means, 
work)  is pursued  for  a wide range  of goals  and satisfactions.  An ami- 
able lunch with  co-workers  may be the  most significant  part  of the day 
for a jobholder.  Mothers pushing  baby carriages  may also be talking  to 
friends,  doing  errands, getting  a bite  to eat,  and looking  for  a book at 
the local bookstore  or  library.  In the  course of these activities,  still  an- 
other  "purpose"  might  arise, unbidden.  The man or  woman  driving  to 
work  may not  just  be driving  to  work.  He  or  she may care  about the 
scenery or companionship   along the way  and the availability   of coffee 
near the parking   lot. Jacobs herself  was an enormously  gifted  "eye on 
the street,"  and  she wrote   in  full  recognition   of  the  great  variety  of 
human purposes embedded in  any activity. The purpose  of the city is to 
accommodate  and abet this rich  diversity  and not  to thwart  it. And  the 
persistent  failure  of urban-planning   doctrines  to do  so, she suggested, 
had something  to do with  gender.95 


Authoritarian  Planning as Urban Taxidermy 

     For Jacobs, the city  as a social organism  is a living  structure  that  is 
constantly  changing  and springing  surprises.  Its  interconnections   are 
so complex and dimly  understood  that  planning  always  risks unknow- 
ingly  cutting  into its  living  tissue, thereby  damaging or  killing  vital  so- 
cial  processes. She contrasts  the  "art"  of the  planner  to the  practical 
conduct  of daily  life:   "A city cannot be a work of  art. .  . . In  relation  to 
the inclusiveness  and literally   endless intricacy   of life, art  is arbitrary, 
symbolic,  and  abstracted.  That  is its value  and  the source  of its  own 
kind  of order  and  coherence. . .  . The results of such  profound  confu- 
sion between art  and life are neither  life nor  art. They are taxidermy.  In 
its place,  taxidermy  can be a useful and  decent craft.  However, it  goes 
too  far  when  the  specimens put  on  display  are  exhibitions   of  dead, 
stuffed cities."96 The core of Jacobs's case against modern city planning 
was that  it placed  a static grid  over this  profusion  of unknowable   pos- 
sibilities.   She  condemned  Ebenezer  Howard's   vision   of the  garden 
city  because its planned   segregation  presumed  that  farmers,  factory 
workers,   and  businessmen  would  remain   fixed  and  distinct   castes. 
Such a presumption   failed  to respect  or provide  for  the "spontaneous 
self-diversification"    and  fluidity    that  were  the  main  features   of  the 
nineteenth-century   city.97 

157
140 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     Urban  planners' great penchant  for  massive schemes of slum clear- 
ance was attacked on the  same grounds. Slums were  the first  foothold 
of poor migrants  to the city. As long as these areas were reasonably sta- 
ble,  the  economy  relatively   strong,   and  people  and  businesses not 
starved for  credit,   the slums  could,  given  time,  manage to  "unslum" 
themselves. Many already had. Planners frequently  destroyed "unslum- 
ming  slums"  because these areas violated   their  doctrines   of "layout, 
use, ground  coverage,  mixture  and  a~tivities"~~-notto      mention  the 
land speculation  and security  concerns behind  much  "urban renewal." 
     From  time to  time Jacobs stands back  from the  infinite  and chang- 
ing variety  of  American  cities  to  express a certain  awe  and humility: 
"Their  intricate   order-a      manifestation   of  the freedom  of  countless 
numbers of people  to make and carry  out  countless plans-is    in  many 
ways a great wonder.  We ought not  to be reluctant   to make this  living 
collection   of  interdependent   uses,  this  freedom,  this  life,   more  un- 
derstandable  for what  it  is, nor so unaware  that  we do not know  what 
it  is."99 The magisterial    assumption   behind  the   doctrines   of  many 
urban  planners-that      they  know  what  people want  and  how  people 
should spend their  time-seems     to Jacobs shortsighted  and arrogant. 
They assumed, or  at least  their  plans assumed, that  people  preferred 
open spaces, visual (zoned) order, and quiet. They assumed that people 
wanted  to live  in one place  and work  in  another. Jacobs believes they 
were  mistaken,  and  most  important,   she is  prepared  to  argue  from 
close daily  observation   at street  level  rather  than  stipulating   human 
wishes from  above. 
     The logic behind  the spatial segregation and single-use zoning of the 
urban  planners that  Jacobs criticized  was  at once aesthetic, scientific, 
and practical.   As an aesthetic  matter,  it  led to  the visual  regularity- 
even regimentation-that      a sculptural   view of  the ensemble required. 
As a scientific matter  it reduced the  number of unknowns  for which  the 
planner  had to find  a solution. Like  simultaneous  equations in algebra, 
too many unknowns  in urban  planning  rendered any solution  problem- 
atic  or  else  required  heroic   assumptions.  The  problem   the planner 
faced was analogous to that  of the forester. One modern  solution to  the 
forester's  dilemma  was to borrow  a management  technique  called op- 
timum   control   theory,  whereby  the  sustained  timber  yield   could  be 
successfully  predicted   by few  observations   and a  parsimonious   for- 
mula.  It goes without  saying that optimum   control  theory was simplest 
where  more  variables  could  be turned  into  constants.  Thus  a single- 
species, same-age forest  planted  in  straight  lines  on a flat  plain  with 
consistent  soil  and moisture  profiles   yielded  simpler  and more  accu- 

158
                                                                          The High-Modemist City 141 


rate optimum   control  formulas.   Compared  to uniformity,    diversity  is 
always more  difficult    to  design, build,   and  control.  When  Ebenezer 
Howard  approached town  planning  as a simple, two-variable   problem 
of relating  housing  needs to the quantity  of jobs in  a closed system, he 
was both temporally   and functionally   operating  "scientifically"    within 
those self-imposed limits.  Formulas  for green space, light,  schools, and 
square meters per capita  did  the rest. 
     In  urban  planning   as in  forestry,  it  is a  short  step from  parsimo- 
nious assumptions to the practice  of shaping  the environment  so that it 
satisfies the simplifications   required  by the formula.   The logic of  plan- 
ning for  the shopping  needs of  a given population   serves as an exam- 
ple. Once planners  applied the  formula  for a certain  number  of square 
feet of commercial  space, parceled  out among  such categories as food 
and clothing,   they  realized  that  they would   then have  to make  these 
shopping centers monopolistic   within  their  areas, lest nearby competi- 
tors draw  away their  clientele. The whole  point was to legislate  the for- 
mula,  thereby   guaranteeing  the  shopping   center  a  monopoly  of  its 
catchment  area.loO Rigid, single-use  zoning  is,  then,  not just  an  aes- 
thetic  measure. It  is an indispensable  aid to  scientific  planning,  and it 
can also  be used  to transform    formulas  posing  as observations   into 
self-fulfilling   prophesies. 
     The radically    simplified   city, provided   it  is viewed  from  above, is 
also practical   and efficient.  The  organization  of  services-electricity, 
water, sewage, mail-is     simplified   both below  and above ground.  Sin- 
gle-use  districts,   by  virtue   of  the  repetition   of  functionally    similar 
apartments  or  offices, are simpler  to produce  and  build.  Le Corbusier 
looked forward   to a future  when  all the  components of  such buildings 
would  be  industrially   prefabricated.lol    Zoning  along  these lines  also 
produces  a city that  is, district  by  district,  both  more uniform   aesthet- 
ically  and more "orderly"   functionally.  A single activity  or narrow  band 
of activities   is appropriate   to  each district:   work   in the  business dis- 
trict,  family  life  in the residential  quarter,  shopping  and entertainment 
in the  commercial  district.   As a police matter,  this  functional  segrega- 
tion  minimizes  unruly   crowds  and introduces  as much  regimentation 
into  the movement  and conduct of the population   as physical planning 
alone can  encourage. 
      Once the desire  for comprehensive   urban  planning  is established, 
the logic  of uniformity   and regimentation   is well-nigh  inexorable.  Cost 
effectiveness contributes  to this  tendency. Just as it saves a prison trou- 
ble  and  money if  all  prisoners   wear  uniforms   of the  same material, 
color,  and size, every concession  to diversity  is likely  to entail  a corre- 

159
142 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


spending  increase  in  administrative   time  and  budgetary  cost.  If  the 
planning  authority   does not need to  make concessions to popular   de- 
sires, the one-size-fits-all  solution  is likely  to prevail.Io2 
     Against the planners'  eye and formulas,  Jacobs juxtaposes her own. 
Her aesthetic,  she would  claim,  is pragmatic   and street  level, an  aes- 
thetic  that  has as its reference  the  experienced  working   order  of the 
city  for the  people  who  live there.  She  asks, What  physical  environ- 
ments draw people, facilitate  circulation,   promote  social exchange and 
contact, and satisfy both  utilitarian   and nonutilitarian    needs? This per- 
spective leads her  to many judgments.   Short  blocks  are preferable  to 
long blocks because they knit  together  more activities.  Large  truck  de- 
pots or filling   stations  that break  the continuity   of pedestrian   interest 
are to be avoided.  To be kept  to a minimum   are huge  roads and  vast, 
forbidding   open spaces that  operate  as visual  and  physical  barriers. 
There is  a logic  here, but  it  is not  an a  priori   visual  logic,  nor  is it  a 
purely  utilitarian   logic  narrowly   conceived. Rather,  it is a standard  of 
evaluation  that  springs  from  how  satisfactorily   a given  arrangement 
meets the social and practical  desires of urban  dwellers  as those needs 
are revealed in  their  actual activity. 


Planning for the Unplanned 

     The historic   diversity  of the city-the      source of its value  and mag- 
netism-is     an unplanned  creation   of many hands  and long  historical 
practice.  Most cities  are the outcome,  the vector  sum, of innumerable 
small acts bearing  no discernible  overall  intention.  Despite  the best ef- 
forts  of monarchs,  planning  bodies,  and capitalist   speculators,  "most 
city  diversity  is the creation  of  incredible  numbers  of different  people 
and different  private  organizations,  with vastly  different  ideas and pur- 
poses, planning and contriving   outside the formal  framework   of public 
action."Io3 Le Corbusier would  have agreed with  this description  of  the 
existing  city, and  it  was precisely  what  appalled  him.  It  was just  this 
cacophony  of intentions  that  was responsible  for  the clutter,  ugliness, 
disorder,  and inefficiencies  of the unplanned  city.  Looking  at the same 
social  and historical   facts, Jacobs sees reason to  praise them:  "Cities 
have  the capability   of  providing    something  for   everybody, only  be- 
cause, and only when, they are  created by everybody."104 She is no free- 
market  libertarian,   however;  she understands   clearly  that  capitalists 
and speculators  are, willy-nilly,    transforming   the city  with  their  com- 
mercial  muscle  and  political   influence.   But  when it  comes  to urban 
public  policy,  she thinks  planning   ought  not to usurp  this  unplanned 
city:  "The main  responsibility  of  city planning  and  design should be to 

160
                                                                          The High-Modemist City 143 


develop, insofar   as public  policy  and action  can  do so, cities  that  are 
congenial  places  for  this  great  range  of unofficial    plans,  ideas, and 
opportunities   to fl0urish."~05 Whereas Le  Corbusier's  planner   is con- 
cerned with  the overall  form  of the cityscape  and its efficiency  in mov- 
ing  people from   point  to  point,   Jacobs's planner  consciously  makes 
room  for  the  unexpected,  small,   informal,   and  even  nonproductive 
human activities  that  constitute  the vitality   of the "lived  city." 
     Jacobs is more  aware  than  most urban  planners  of  the ecological 
and market  forces continually   transforming   the city. The succession of 
harbors, railroads,  and highways  as means of moving people and goods 
had already marked  the rise and decline of sections of the city. Even the 
successful, animated   neighborhoods  that  Jacobs  so prizes  were,  she 
recognizes, becoming  victims  of  their  own success. Areas were  "colo- 
nized"  by urban  migrants  because land values,  and hence rents,  were 
cheap. As an area became more desirable to live in, its rents rose and its 
local commerce  changed, the new businesses often driving out the orig- 
inal  pioneers who  had helped  transform  it.  The nature  of the  city was 
flux  and change;  a successful  neighborhood  could  not  be frozen  and 
preserved by  the planners.  A city  that  was extensively  planned would 
inevitably  diminish   much  of the diversity  that  is the hallmark   of great 
towns. The  best a planner  can hope for  is to  modestly  enhance rather 
than impede  the development  of urban complexity. 
     For  Jacobs, how  a city develops  is something  like  how  a language 
evolves. A language is the joint  historical   creation of  millions  of speak- 
ers. Although  all  speakers have some effect  on the trajectory   of a lan- 
guage, the process is not particularly    egalitarian.  Linguists,  grammar- 
ians,  and educators,  some of  them  backed by  the power  of  the state, 
weigh in  heavily. But the process is not particularly  amenable to a dicta- 
torship,  either. Despite  the efforts toward   "central  planning,"  language 
(especially its  everyday spoken form)  stubbornly  tends to go on its own 
rich,  multivalent,  colorful  way. Similarly,  despite  the attempts by urban 
planners toward  designing and stablizing  the city, it escapes their grasp; 
it is always being  reinvented and inflected  by its inhabitants.lo6 For both 
a large city  and a rich  language, this  openness, plasticity, and diversity 
allow  them  to  serve an endless  variety  of purposes-many      of which 
have yet to be conceived. 
        he analogy  can be  pressed further.   Like  planned  cities,  planned 
languages  are  indeed possible.  Esperanto   is one  example;  technical 
and  scientific  languages  are  another,  and they  are quite  precise  and 
powerful   means of  expression within   the  limited  purposes  for  which 
they were  designed. But language per  se is not for only one or  two pur- 
poses. It is a general tool  that can be bent to countless  ends by virtue of 

161
144 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


its adaptability    and  flexibility.   The very  history   of  an inherited    lan- 
guage helps to  provide  the  range  of  associations  and meanings  that 
sustain its plasticity.  In much  the same way, one could plan  a city from 
zero. But  since no individual   or  committee  could  ever completely  en- 
compass the purposes and lifeways,  both  present and  future,  that ani- 
mate its residents,  it would  necessarily  be a thin  and pale version  of a 
complex city with  its own history.  It will  be a Brasilia,  Saint Petersburg, 
or Chandigarh  rather than  a Rio de Janeiro, Moscow, or  Calcutta. Only 
time and the work  of  millions  of its  residents can turn  these thin  cities 
into thick  cities.  The grave shortcoming   of a planned  city  is that it  not 
only fails to  respect the autonomous purposes  and subjectivity  of those 
who live  in it  but also  fails to  allow  sufficiently  for  the contingency   of 
the interaction  between  its inhabitants   and what that  produces. 
     Jacobs has a kind of  informed  respect  for the novel  forms  of social 
order  that  emerge  in  many  city   neighborhoods.   This  respect  is  re- 
flected in  her  attention   to the  mundane  but  meaningful   human  con- 
nections  in  a functioning    neighborhood.   While   recognizing   that  no 
urban neighborhood   can ever be, or  should be, static,  she stresses the 
minimal  degree  of continuity,   social networks,   and "street-terms"   ac- 
quaintanceship   required  to  knit   together  an  urban  locality.   "If  self- 
government  in the  place is to work,"  she muses,  "underlying   any float 
of population   must be  a continuity   of people  who have  forged neigh- 
borhood  networks.   These networks   are  a city's  irreplaceable    social 
capital. Whenever  the capital  is lost, from  whatever  cause, the [social] 
income from  it  disappears,  never to return  until   and unless new  capi- 
tal is slowly  and chancily  accumulated."107 It follows from  this vantage 
point that  even in the case of slums, Jacobs was implacably  opposed to 
the wholesale   slum-clearance  projects   that  were  so  much  in  vogue 
when she was  writing.  The  slum might   not have much  social  capital, 
but what  it  did  have was  something  to build   on, not  destroy.lo8 What 
keeps Jacobs from becoming a Burkean conservative, celebrating  what- 
ever history  has thrown  up,  is her  emphasis on  change, renewal,  and 
invention.  To try to arrest  this  change (although  one might  try to mod- 
estly influence  it) would  be not  only unwise  but futile. 
     Strong  neighborhoods,   like  strong  cities,  are the  product  of com- 
plex processes  that  cannot  be replicated   from   above. Jacobs quotes 
with  approval   Stanley Tankel,  a planner  who  made  the rarely   heard 
case against large-scale slum  clearance  in these terms:  "The next step 
will  require  great humility,  since we  are now so prone to confuse  great 
building  projects with  great social  achievements. We will have to admit 
that it  is beyond the scope of anyone's imagination  to  create a commu- 
nity. We must learn to  cherish the communities   we have, they are hard 

162
                                                                          The High-Modernist City 145 


to come by. 'Fix the buildings,  but leave the people.'  'No relocation  out- 
side the neighborhood.'   These must be the slogans if public  housing  is 
to be popular."lo9 In fact, the political  logic  of Jacobs's case is that while 
the planner   cannot   create  a  functioning   community,   a  functioning 
community  can, within  limits,  improve  its own  condition.  Standing the 
planning  logic on its head, she explains how a reasonably strong  neigh- 
borhood can, in  a democratic setting,  fight to create and maintain  good 
schools, useful parks, vital  urban  services, and decent housing. 
     Jane Jacobs was writing   against the major  figures  still  dominating 
the urban  planning   landscape  of her  day:  Ebenezer  Howard  and  Le 
Corbusier. To some of her critics  she has seemed a rather conservative 
figure,  extolling  the virtues  of community   in poor  neighborhoods  that 
many were  anxious to  leave and ignoring  the  degree to which  the city 
was already  being  "planned,"  not by popular   initiative   or by  the state 
but by  developers  and financiers  with   political   connections.  There  is 
some justice to  these points of  view. For our  purposes, however,  there 
is little  doubt  that she has put  her finger  on the central  flaws of  hubris 
in  high-modernist   urban  planning.   The first  flaw  is  the presumption 
that planners  can safely make most  of the predictions   about the future 
that their   schemes require.  We know enough  by now  to be exception- 
ally  skeptical  about  forecasting  from  current   trends in  fertility   rates, 
urban  migration,   or  the  structure  of  employment  and  income.  Such 
predictions  have often  been wildly  wrong.  As for wars,  oil  embargoes, 
weather, consumer  tastes, and political  eruptions,  our capacity  for pre- 
diction   is practically    nil.  Second,  thanks  in  part  to  Jacobs, we  now 
know  more about what  constitutes  a satisfactory neighborhood   for the 
people who  live  in it,  but we still  know  precious  little  about  how such 
communities  can  be fostered and maintained.   Working  from formulas 
about density,  green space, and transportation   may produce  narrowly 
efficient  outcomes,  but  it  is  unlikely  to  result  in  a desirable  place  to 
live.  Brasilia  and Chandigarh,   at a minimum,  demonstrate  this. 
     It  is not  a coincidence  that many  of the high-modernist   cities  actu- 
ally  built-Brasilia,       Canberra,  Saint  Petersburg,  Islamabad,  Chandi- 
garh, Abuja,  Dodoma,  Ciudad  G~ayana~~O-have been administrative 
capitals.  Here at the center  of state power, in a completely  new setting, 
with  a population  consisting  largely  of state employees who have to re- 
side there,  the state  can virtually   stipulate  the success of its  planning 
grid.  The  fact that  the  business of  the city  is  state administration    al- 
ready vastly  simplifies  the task  of planning.  Authorities   do not have to 
contend,  as did Haussmann, with  preexisting  commercial   and cultural 
centers. And because the authorities  control  the instruments  of  zoning, 
employment,  housing,  wage levels, and physical  layout,  they can bend 

163
146 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


the environment    to  the city.  These  urban  planners   backed  by state 
power are  rather  like tailors  who  are not  only  free to invent  whatever 
suit of clothes  they  wish but  also free  to trim  the  customer  so that he 
fits the measure. 
     Urban  planners who  reject  "taxidermy," Jacobs claims,  must never- 
theless invent a kind  of planning  that  encourages novel  initiatives  and 
contingencies,  foreclosing  as few  options as possible,  and that fosters 
the circulation   and contact  out of which  such initiatives   arise. To illus- 
trate  the diversity   of urban  life,  Jacobs  lists  more than  a  dozen uses 
which  have been  served  over the  years by  the  center  for  the arts  in 
Louisville:  stable, school, theater, bar,  athletic  club, blacksmith's  forge, 
factory,  warehouse,  artists'  studio.  She then  asks, rhetorically,   "Who 
could  anticipate   or provide   for  such  a succession  of hopes  and ser- 
vices?" Her answer is simple:  "Only an unimaginative   man would think 
he could; only  an arrogant  man would  want  to."111 

164
5      The     Revolutionary                  Party: 
        A   Plan       and     a   Diagnosis 


   Feeling, Comrade C, is a mass element, but thought is organization. Comrade 
   Lenin said that organization is the highest of all of us. 
    -Andrei Platonov, Chevengur 

   Communism was modernity's most devout, vigorous and gallant champion. . . . 
   It was under communist. . . auspices that the audacious dream of modernity, 
   freed from obstacles by the merciless and omnipotent state, was pushed to its 
   radical limits: grand designs, unlimited social engineering, huge and bulky 
   technology, total transformation of nature. 
    -Zygmunt Bauman, "Living Without an Alternative" 



Lenin's design for the construction of the revolution was in many 
ways comparable to Le Corbusier's design for the construction of the 
modern city. Both were complex endeavors that had to be entrusted to 
the professionalism and scientific insight of a trained cadre with full 
power to see the plan through. And just as Le Corbusier and Lenin 
shared a broadly comparable high modernism, so Jane Jacobs's per- 
spective was shared by Rosa Luxemburg and Aleksandra Kollontay, 
who opposed Lenin's politics. Jacobs doubted both the possibility and 
the desirability of the centrally planned city, and Luxemburg and Kol- 
lontay doubted the possibility and desirability of a revolution planned 
from above by the vanguard party. 


Lenin: Architect and Engineer of Revolution 

Lenin, if we judge him from his major writings, was a convinced high 
modernist. The broad lines of his thought were quite consistent; 
whether he was writing about revolution, industrial planning, agricul- 
tural organization, or administration, he focused on a unitary scien- 
tific answer that was known to a trained intelligentsia and that ought 
to be followed. The Lenin of practice was, of course, something else 
again. His capacity for sensing the popular mood in fashioning Bol- 
shevik propaganda, for beating a tactical retreat when it seemed pru- 
dent, and for striking boldly to seize the advantage was more relevant 
than his high modernism to his success as a revolutionary. It is Lenin 
as a high modernist, however, with whom we are primarily concerned. 

165
148 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


     The major  text for  the elaboration   of Lenin's high-modernist   views 
of revolution   is What Is to Be Done?'  High  modernism  was integral  to 
the central  purpose  of Lenin's  argument:  to convince  the  Russian left 
that only  a  small,  selected, centralized,  professional   cadre of  revolu- 
tionaries could  bring about a revolution  in  Russia. Written in  1903, well 
before the "dress rehearsal" revolution   of 1905, this view was never en- 
tirely  abandoned,  even under  totally  different   circumstances  in  19 17 
between the February  overthrow  of the  czar and the Bolshevik  seizure 
of power  in October, when  he wrote State and Revolution.  I  shall com- 
pare Lenin's view in  these two works  and in his writings  on  agriculture 
with  Rosa Luxemburg's  "Mass-Strike,   Party, and Trade Unions,"  writ- 
ten in reply  to What Is to Be Done? and with the writings   of Aleksandra 
Kollontay,  an important   figure  in what  was called  the Workers'  Oppo- 
sition,  a  group  within    the  Bolshevik   party  who   criticized   many  of 
Lenin's policies  after the  revolution. 


The Lenin of What Is to Be Done? 

     Lenin's choice of the title  What Is to Be Done? has great significance. 
It  was  also  the title   of  an  exceptionally   popular   novel by  Nicholas 
Chernyshevsky,  in which   a "new  man"  of the  intelligentsia   set about 
destroying  the old  order  and  then ruling   autocratically   to  establish a 
social  utopia.  It  had  been the  favorite   book  of Lenin's  adored  older 
brother,  Alexander, who  had been executed  in  1887 for a plot  against 
the czar's life.  Even after Lenin  became a Marxist,  it was still  his favor- 
ite book:  "I  became acquainted   with  the works   of Marx,  Engels,  and 
Plekhanov, but  it was  only Chernyshevsky  who  had an overwhelming 
influence  on me."2 The idea that superior  knowledge, authoritarian    in- 
struction,   and  social  design  could  transform   society  pervades  both 
works. 
     Certain  metaphors  suffuse Lenin's  analysis of  the link  between the 
vanguard  party  and  the workers  in  What Is  to Be Done? They set the 
tone of the  work  and limit  what  can be  said within  its  confines. These 
metaphors  center  on the classroom  and  the bar rack^.^ The party  and 
its local  agitators  and propagandists  function   as schoolteachers capa- 
ble of raising  merely economic  complaints  to the level of  revolutionary 
political   demands, or they function   as officers in  a revolutionary  army 
who  deploy their  troops  to best  advantage. In  their  roles  as teachers, 
the vanguard  party and  its newspaper develop  a pedagogical style that 
is  decidedly  authoritarian.    The party   analyzes the  many  and varied 
popular   grievances and,  at  the right   time,  "dictate[s]   a positive  pro- 
gramme  of action"  that  will  contribute   to a  "universal  political   strug- 

166
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 149 


gle.'I4 In fact, Lenin complained, the party's  activists have been woefully 
inadequate. It  is not enough  to call the  movement a "vanguard,"  he in- 
sisted. "We must act in  such a way that all  other units  of the army shall 
see us, and be obliged to admit  that  we are the vanguard."  The goal  of 
the vanguard  party  is to  train  willing   but  "backward"   proletarians   in 
revolutionary   politics  so that  they may  be inducted  into  an army  that 
will  "collect  and utilize  every grain of even rudimentary  protest,"  there- 
by creating a disciplined   revolutionary  army.5 
     In  keeping with   these metaphors,  the "masses" in  general  and the 
working   class in  particular    become  "the  body," while   the  vanguard 
party is "the brain."  The party is to the working  class as intelligence is to 
brute force, deliberation   to confusion, a manager to a worker,  a teacher 
to a student, an administrator  to a subordinate,  a professional to an am- 
ateur, an army  to a mob, or a scientist  to a layman.  A brief explanation 
of how  these metaphors  work  will  help  situate Lenin's  own version  of 
high-modern,  albeit  revolutionary,  politics. 
     Lenin  realized,  of course,  that  the revolutionary   project  depended 
on popular  militancy   and spontaneous protest.  The problem  of relying 
solely  on popular   action  from  below,  however,  was that  such  action 
was scattered  and sporadic,   making  easy pickings  for  the czarist  po- 
lice.  If we think  of  popular  action  as incendiary  political   material,  the 
role  of the vanguard  party  was  to concentrate  and  aim this  explosive 
charge  so that  its detonation   could bring   down  the regime.  The van- 
guard  party  "merged  the elemental  destructive  force  of a crowd   with 
the conscious  destructive  force of  the organization   of  revolutionist^."^ 
It  was the thinking  organ of the revolution,   ensuring that  the otherwise 
diffuse brute  force  of the masses was effectively used. 
     The  logic  of  this  perspective  led  Lenin   to think   of  the  vanguard 
party  as a would-be  general  staff  to a vast  but undisciplined    army  of 
raw  recruits  already in  combat. The more  unruly  the army, the greater 
the need for  a small,  cohesive general  staff. To his competitors   on the 
left  (the  Economists),  who  argued  that  ten wise  men could  easily  be 
grabbed  by the police,  whereas  one hundred   fools (the  revolutionary 
crowd)   could  not be  stopped,  Lenin  replied,   "Without  the  'dozen'  of 
tried   and talented   leaders  (and  talented  men  are  not  born  by  hun- 
dreds),  professionally  trained,  schooled  by long experience  and work- 
ing  in perfect  harmony,  no  class in modern  society  is capable  of con- 
ducting  a determined  ~truggle."~ 
      Lenin's  analogies  to  military   organization   were  not  just  colorful 
figures  of  speech; they  were  how  he  thought  about  most  aspects  of 
party  organization.   He wrote  of  "tactics"  and  "strategy"  in  a straight- 
forwardly   military   style. Only a general staff is capable  of deploying  its 

167
150 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


revolutionary   forces in accord  with  an overall  battle  plan. Only  a gen- 
eral  staff  can see the  entire  battlefield   and  anticipate   enemy  move- 
ments. Only a general staff would  have the "flexibility   . . . to adapt itself 
immediately   to the  most  diverse and  rapidly   changing  conditions   of 
struggle," the  "ability  to renounce  an open fight  against overwhelming 
and concentrated   forces,  and yet  capable of  taking  advantage  of the 
awkwardness  and immobility   of  the enemy and  of attacking  at a time 
and a place where he least expects atta~k."~The  earlier failures of social 
democrat  revolutionaries   could, he insisted,  be attributed   precisely to 
the absence of organization,  planning,  and coordination   that a general 
staff could provide.  These "young warriors,"   who had "marched  to bat- 
tle with   astonishingly   primitive   equipment   and  training,"  were  "like 
peasants from the  plough, snatching  up  a club." Their  "immediate  and 
complete defeat"  was a foregone conclusion   "because these open con- 
flicts were  not the result  of a systematic  and carefully  thought-out  and 
gradually  prepared plan  for a prolonged  and stubborn  str~ggle."~ 
     Part  of the  necessity  for  strict  discipline   arose  from  the fact  that 
the enemies of  revolution  were  better  armed and  more sophisticated. 
This  explains  why  "freedom   of  criticism"    among  the  revolutionary 
forces could  only favor  opportunists   and the ascendancy of  bourgeois 
values.  Once again  Lenin   seized on  a military    analogy  to  drive  the 
point  home:  "We are  marching   in a  compact  group  along  a precipi- 
tous and difficult   path,  firmly  holding   each other  by the hand. We are 
surrounded  on  all  sides by enemies, and  are under  their  almost  con- 
stant fire.  We have combined voluntarily,   especially  for the purpose  of 
fighting  the enemy and  not to retreat  into  the adjacent  marsh," that  is, 
freedom  of criticism.'O 
     The relationship   envisioned  by  Lenin between  the vanguard  party 
and its rank  and file is perhaps best exemplified  by the terms  "mass" or 
"masses." Although  the  terms became  standard  in  socialist  parlance, 
they  are  heavy  with   implications.    Nothing   better   conveys  the  im- 
pression  of mere  quantity   and number   without  order   than the  word 
"masses." Once the  rank  and  file are  so labeled,  it  is clear  that  what 
they chiefly  add to  the revolutionary   process are their  weight  in  num- 
bers and the  kind  of brute  force  they can represent  if  firmly  directed. 
The impression  conveyed is of a huge, formless, milling   crowd without 
any cohesion-without       a history, without   ideas, without   a plan of  ac- 
tion.  Lenin  was all  too  aware,  of course,  that the  working   class does 
have its own  history  and values,  but this  history  and these values will 
lead the working   class in the wrong  direction  unless they  are replaced 
by the  historical   analysis  and  advanced  revolutionary   theory  of  sci- 
entific  socialism. 

168
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 15 1 


     Thus the  vanguard  party  not only  is essential  to the  tactical  cohe- 
sion of  the masses but  also must  literally   do their  thinking    for them. 
The party functions  as an executive elite whose grasp of history  and  di- 
alectical  materialism   allows  it to  devise the correct  "war  aims"  of the 
class struggle. Its authority   is based on its scientific  intelligence.  Lenin 
quoted the  "profoundly   true  and  important   utterances  by Karl   Kaut- 
sky," who said that  the  proletariat   cannot  aspire  to "modern   socialist 
consciousness"  on  its  own because  it  lacks  the  "profound   scientific 
knowledge"  required  to do so: "The vehicles of science are not  the pro- 
letariat,  but the  bourgeois intelligent~ia."~~ 
     This  is the core of  Lenin's case against  spontaneity. There  are only 
two  ideologies:  bourgeois  and socialist.  Given  the  pervasiveness and 
historical   power of  bourgeois ideology,  the spontaneous  development 
of the working   class will  always  lead to the  triumph   of bourgeois  ide- 
ology. In  Lenin's  memorable   formulation,    "the working   class,  exclu- 
sively by its  own effort,  is able  to develop only  trade-union   conscious- 
ness."12 Social democratic consciousness, in contrast,  must come from 
outside, that  is, from  the socialist  intelligentsia.   The vanguard  party  is 
depicted  as conscious,  scientific,  and socialist   in the  full  sense and is 
contrasted  with  the  masses who are, by  extension,  unconscious,  pre- 
scientific,   and   in  constant   danger   of  absorbing   bourgeois   values. 
Lenin's stern  admonitions   about indiscipline-"to       deviate from   it [so- 
cialist  ideology]  in the slightest  degree means strengthening  bourgeois 
ide0logy"~3-leave    the impression   of a general  staff  whose tight  con- 
trol  is the only counterweight   to a force of conscripts  who might  at any 
moment  disband and  wander off. 
     Another  metaphor occasionally  replaces those of the army and class- 
room  in  Lenin's discourse.  It  is the  image of a bureaucratic    or indus- 
trial  enterprise  in  which  only the executives and  engineers can see the 
larger  purposes of the  organization.  Lenin  appeals to something  like  a 
division  of labor  in  revolutionary   work, where  the executive has a mo- 
nopoly  on the advanced theory without   which revolution   is impossible. 
Resembling  factory  owners  and  engineers who  design  rational  plans 
for  production,   the vanguard  party  possesses a scientific grasp of  rev- 
olutionary   theory that  makes it uniquely  able to  guide the entire  prole- 
tarian   struggle  for  emancipation.   It  was  a bit  too early,  in  1903,  for 
Lenin  to  refer  to  the assembly  lines  of mass production    to make  his 
point,  but  he appropriated   the next best analogy  from  the building  in- 
dustry.  "Pray tell  me," he proposed.  "When  a brick  layer lays bricks  in 
various  parts   of an  enormous structure,   the like   of which   has never 
been seen before,  is it  a 'paper'   line that  he uses to help  him  find  the 
correct  place  to place  each brick,  to indicate  to  him the  ultimate  goal 

169
152 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


of the work  as a whole,  to  enable him  to use not  only  every brick  but 
even every piece of brick,  which,  joining  with  the bricks  placed before 
and after  it, forms  a complete  and all  embracing  line? And are we  not 
now passing  through  a period  in  our  party  life,  when we  have bricks 
and bricklayers,  but we  lack the guiding  line,  visible to all,  by which  to 
guide our  movement^?"^^ What the party has is the blueprint   of the en- 
tire new  structure,  which   its scientific  insight  has made  possible. The 
role  of the  workers  is  to follow   that  part  of  the blueprint   allotted   to 
them  in the  confidence  that   the architects   of  revolution   know  what 
they are doing. 
     The analogy to the division  of labor  in modern  capitalist  production 
has implications    roughly  parallel   to  those of  the military    metaphor. 
Both, for  example, require  authoritarian    methods and central  control. 
Thus Lenin  wrote  of the party's  need "to  distribute  the  thousand-and- 
one minute   functions   of  their   organizational   work,"   complained   of 
"technical  defects," and called for  the unification   of "all  these tiny frac- 
tions into  one whole." As he concluded, "specialization   necessarily pre- 
supposes centralization,  and  in its turn  imperatively   calls for  it."15 
     It  is surely a great  paradox of  What Is to Be Done? that Lenin  takes 
a subject-promoting       revolution-that       is inseparable   from  popular 
anger, violence, and the  determination  of new  political  ends and trans- 
forms it  into a discourse on technical  specialization,   hierarchy, and the 
efficient  and predictable   organization  of  means. Politics miraculously 
disappears from  within   the revolutionary    ranks and  is left to  the elite 
of the  vanguard   party,  much  as industrial    engineers  might  discuss, 
among themselves,  how to  lay out a factory  floor.  The vanguard  party 
is a  machine  to  produce  a  revolution.   There  is  no need  for  politics 
within  the  party inasmuch  as the  science and rationality   of the social- 
ist intelligentsia   require instead  a technically  necessary subordination; 
the party's judgments   are not subjective  and value  laden but  objective 
and logically  inevitable. 
     Lenin  extends  this  line of  reasoning  to his  characterization   of  the 
revolutionary   elite.  They are  not mere  revolutionaries;   they are  "pro- 
fessional  revolutionists."   He  insists  on  the  full  meaning  of  the  term 
"professional":   someone who is an experienced,  full-time,   trained  rev- 
olutionist.  This  small, secret,  disciplined,  professional  cadre is specifi- 
cally  contrasted   to workers'   organizations,   which   are large,  public, 
and established according  to  trades. The two are never to  be confused. 
Thus, to the analogy  of the factory  manager vis-a-vis the worker,  Lenin 
adds that  of the professional   vis-a-vis the  apprentice  or amateur.  It  is 
assumed that  those  in the  second  category will   defer  to those  in the 
first  on the basis of their  greater  technical  knowledge  and experience. 

170
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 153 


Just as Le  Corbusier   imagines  that  the  public  will   acquiesce  to  the 
knowledge   and  calculations    of  the   master  architect,    so  Lenin   is 
confident  that  a sensible worker  will   want  to place himself  under  the 
authority  of professional  revolutionists. 
     Let us return,  finally,  to the  metaphor  of the schoolroom  where  the 
vanguard  party  is the teacher  and the masses are the  pupils.  Lenin  is 
hardly  unique  in his use of this  analogy. His  was a pedagogical  age in 
general, and reading  circles  for workers  and  schools for socialist  mili- 
tants were  common,  especially  in  Germany,  where  Rosa Luxemburg 
taught at the Socialist  Party's school in  Berlin.  Although the imagery  of 
the schoolroom  may  have been commonplace,   Lenin's particular    use 
of it  to characterize   socialist  training   bears emphasis.  A tremendous 
amount of  Lenin's thought  and prose was devoted to  "socialist  instruc- 
tion"  broadly   understood.   He  was preoccupied    with  how   militants 
might  be trained,  the role  of the  party  newspaper, Iskra,  and the  con- 
tent of speeches, manifestos, and slogans.  But Lenin's  socialist school- 
room is fraught  with  danger. His  constant  fear is that the  teachers will 
lose control of the  students and be swamped by the pervasive influence 
of narrow   economic   demands,  legislative  reforms,   and purely   local 
concerns.  The  classroom   metaphor   is  inherently    hierarchical,    but 
Lenin's main  worry  is that  his socialist  teachers will  succumb  and  "go 
native." Lurking   near the surface  of Lenin's writings   is a powerful   cul- 
tural judgment,   which  is evident here  in a representative  passage. 

     Our very first and most imperative duty is to help to train working-class 
     revolutionists who will  be on the same level in regard to party activity as 
     intellectual revolutionists  (we emphasize the words "in regard to party 
     activity"  because although it is  necessary, it is not so easy and not so 
     imperative to bring  workers up to the level of intellectuals  in other  re- 
     spects). Therefore attention must be devoted principally  to the task of 
     raising the workers to the level of revolutionists,  but without,  in doing 
     so, necessarily degrading ourselves to the level of the "labor masses" as 
     the Economists wish  to do, or  necessarily to the  level of the  average 
     worker, as [the newspaper] Svoboda desires to do.16 

     The dilemma  for the party  is how to train   revolutionists  who will  be 
close to the workers  (and perhaps  of worker  backgrounds  themselves) 
but who  will  not be absorbed, contaminated,   and weakened by the po- 
litical  and cultural   backwardness of the workers.   Some of Lenin's wor- 
ries have to do with  his conviction  at the time  that the Russian working 
class and  most of  its  socialist  intelligentsia   were  woefully   backward 
compared  to their  German  counterparts.   In What Is  to Be Done? Ger- 
man  social democracy  and  the German  trade-union   movement  func- 
tion  repeatedly  as the model, in  terms  of which  Russia is found  want- 

171
154 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


ing. But the principle   behind  Lenin's concerns transcends  national  dif- 
ferences; it stems from the sharply  delineated,  functional  roles that  the 
party  and the working   class each played.  Class consciousness,  in the 
final  analysis, is  an objective  truth  carried   solely by  the ideologically 
enlightened  who direct  the vanguard  party." 
     However  contrary  to  Newton's first  law  of motion,  the central  idea 
informing   Lenin's logic  is that  the party  will   be an "unmoved  mover." 
An intimate  association  with  the working  class is absolutely  necessary 
to the task of propaganda  and agitation,  but  it must be a closeness that 
will  never threaten  the  hierarchy  of knowledge,  influence,  and power. 
If  professional  revolutionists   are  to be effective  leaders,  they require 
the kind  of detailed  understanding  and knowledge  of the  workers  that 
successful teachers  need  of  their  students,  military    officers  need  of 
their  troops,  or  production    managers  need of  their  workforce.    It  is 
knowledge  for the purpose  of achieving  goals set by an elite.  The rela- 
tionship  depicted  is so asymmetrical  that  one is even tempted to  com- 
pare it to the  relation that  a craftsman has to his raw  material.  A wood- 
worker   or  a mason  must  know  his  inert   materials  well   in  order  to 
realize  his designs. In  Lenin's case, the  relative  inertness of  the mate- 
rial  being  shaped is implied  by  the global  imagery  of "the  masses" or 
"the proletariat."   Once these flattened terms  are used, it becomes diffi- 
cult  to examine  the  enormous differences   in history,  political   experi- 
ence, organizational   skills, and  ideology  (not to mention  religion,   eth- 
nicity,  and language) that  exist within  the  working  class. 
     There  is still  another  contingent   and  Russia-centered reason  why 
Lenin  might  have insisted  on a small,  disciplined,  and  secret cadre of 
revolutionists.   They were,  after  all,  operating  in  an autocracy,  under 
the noses of the  czarist  secret police.  After  commenting   favorably  on 
the openness of competition  for office within  the  German Social Demo- 
cratic  Party, where,  owing  to certain  political   and press  freedoms, all 
candidates' public   records were  known,  he exclaimed,  "Try to put  this 
picture  in  the frame  of our  autocracy!"18 Where  a revolutionary   must 
conceal  his  identity,   under  pain   of  arrest,  such  openly  democratic 
methods were  impossible.  The  revolutionaries   in  Russia must,  Lenin 
argued,  adapt their  tactics  to  those of their   enemy-the     political  po- 
lice.  If this  were  the only  argument  Lenin  made  for  secrecy and iron 
discipline,   then  it  could  be treated  as an  incidental   tactical   conces- 
sion  to local  conditions.   But it  was not.  The secrecy of  the party  was 
designed to prevent  contamination   from  below  as much as arrest  and 
exile. There is no other  way to interpret  passages like the following:   "If 
such an organization   [a secret body of 'tried'  revolutionists]   existed on 
a firm  theoretical   basis,  and possessed a Social-Democratic   journal, 

172
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 155 


we would have no reason to fear that the movement will  be diverted from 
its path by the numerous  'outside' elements that will  be attracted to it."19 
     How  would  the  movement be  diverted?  Lenin  had chiefly  two  po- 
tential dangers  in mind.  The first  was the danger of spontaneity,  which 
makes the tactical  coordination   of  revolutionary   pressure impossible. 
The second was, of course, the virtually  inevitable ideological  diversion 
of the  working   class  toward  trade   unionism   and legislative   reform. 
Since  authentic,   revolutionary    class consciousness  could  never  de- 
velop autonomously   within  the  working  class,  it followed  that  the ac- 
tual political   outlook   of workers  was always  a threat  to the  vanguard 
Party. 
     It  is  perhaps  for  these reasons  that  when  Lenin  wrote   of propa- 
ganda and agitation,  it was  a one-way transmission  of information   and 
ideas that he had  in mind.  His  unrelenting   emphasis on a party  news- 
paper fit  nicely  into this  context.  A newspaper, even more than  "agita- 
tion"  before heckling   or sullen  crowds,  creates  a decidedly  one-sided 
                                Therelati~nship.~~ organ is a splendid way to diffuse instructions, ex- 
plain  the party  line,  and rally  the troops.  Like  its successor, the radio, 
the newspaper  is a medium  better  suited to  sending messages than to 
receiving  them. 
     On  many  occasions,  Lenin  and  his  colleagues  took  the  threat  of 
contamination   more  literally  and  spoke in metaphors  drawn  from  the 
science of hygiene and the  germ theory of  disease. Thus it became pos- 
sible to  talk  of  "petit-bourgeois   bacilli"   and  "infection."*l  The  shift  in 
imagery was  not far-fetched,  for Lenin  did want  to keep the party  in an 
environment  that  was as sterile and germ-free as possible lest the party 
contract  one of the  many diseases lurking  outside.22 
     Lenin's general treatment  of the working  class in What Is to Be Done? 
is strongly  reminiscent  of Marx's  famous depiction  of the  smallholding 
French peasantry  as a "sack of potatoesv-just    so many  "homologous" 
units lacking   any overall structure   or cohesion. This premise  shapes in 
turn  the role  of the  vanguard  party. The trick   is to change  a formless, 
sporadic,  fragmented,   and localized  anger  among the  masses into an 
organized  force with  purpose  and direction.  Just as the force of a pow- 
erful  magnet  aligns a chaos of  thousands of  iron  filings,  so the party's 
leadership  is expected to turn  a crowd  into  a political  army.  At times it 
is hard   to know  what  the  masses actually  bring  to  the  revolutionary 
project  beyond  the  raw  material  they  represent.  Lenin's catalogue  of 
the  functional   roles  that  the  party  assumes is  quite  comprehensive: 
"We must  go among all classes of people as theoreticians,  as propagan- 
dists, as agitators, and  as Theorgani~ers."~~  inference to be drawn from 
this list  is that the revolutionists   are to provide  knowledge, opinion,  the 

173
156 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


urge and direction   to action,  and  organizational   structure.  Given  this 
unidirectional    flow  of intellectual,   social,  and  cultural   services from 
above, it  is hard  to imagine  what  role  the masses could  have had be- 
yond being mustered  up. 
     Lenin  conceived of a division  of revolutionary   labor  that resembled 
what came  to be the expectation  (if  rarely the  practice)  of Communist 
parties both  in  and out  of power.  The central  committee  made  all the 
crucial  decisions  about tactics  and strategy,  while  the mass organiza- 
tions and trade  unions affiliated  with  the party  served as "transmission 
belts" for  instructions.  If  we consider the vanguard  party, as_Lenin did, 
to be a machine for  bringing  about the  revolution,  then we  see that the 
vanguard  party's  relation   to the  working   class is  not much  different 
from  a  capitalist   entrepreneur's   relation   to  the  working    class. The 
working  class is necessary to production;   its members must be trained 
and instructed,   and  the efficient   organization   of  their  work  must  be 
left  to professional   specialists.  The ends  of the  revolutionist   and  the 
capitalist   are, of  course,  utterly  different,   but  the  problem  of  means 
that  confronts  each is similar   and  is similarly   resolved.  The problem 
of the factory   manager is  how to  deploy so many  factory  "hands"  (in- 
terchangeable  units  all)  for  the  purpose  of  efficient  production.   The 
problem  of the scientific  socialist  party  is how  to efficiently  deploy the 
masses in  order  to  hasten the  revolution.   Such  organizational   logic 
seems more appropriate   to factory  production,   which  involves  steady 
routines,  known  technologies,  and  daily wages, than  to the  decidedly 
nonroutine,   high-stakes  endeavor  of revolution.   Nevertheless,  it  was 
the model  of organization   that  structured   much of  Lenin's argument. 
     To  grasp  the picture   of  Lenin's  utopian   hopes  for  the  vanguard 
party, one might  relate it  to the "mass exercises" that  were enormously 
popular   among  both   reactionary   (mobilizing)    and  left-wing   move- 
ments  of the  turn  of the  century.  Set in  huge  stadiums  or on  parade 
grounds, they  involved thousands  of young men and women  trained  to 
move in  unison.  The more complicated   their  maneuvers,  which  were 
often  set to  rhythmic    music,  the  more  impressive  the  spectacle.  In 
1891,  at the  Second National   Congress of  Sokol,  a Czech gymnastic 
and  physical  fitness  organization    promoting   nationalism,    no  fewer 
than  seventeen thousand  Czechs gave an elaborate  display  of coordi- 
nated  movement.24 The whole idea  of mass exercises  was to create  a 
striking   exhibition   of order,  training,   and discipline   from  above,  one 
that would  awe participants  and  spectators alike with  its display  of dis- 
ciplined  power.  Such  spectacles assumed  and required   a single  cen- 
tralized  authority,  which  planned  and executed the display.25 It is little 
wonder  that  the  new  mass-mobilization   parties  of  all  stripes  should 

174
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 157 


have found public   exhibitions  of this  kind  compatible  with  their  orga- 
nizational   ideology.  Lenin  was  far  too  realistic   to  imagine   that  the 
Russian social democrats  would  ever resemble  anything this  coherent 
and disciplined.   Nevertheless,  it was  clearly  the model  of centralized 
coordination   to which  he  aspired and  thus the  yardstick  by which  he 
measured his achievements. 
     Lenin   and  Le  Corbusier,  notwithstanding    the  great   disparity   in 
their  training   and  purpose,  shared some basic  elements  of the  high- 
modernist  outlook.  While  the scientific   pretensions  of each may seem 
implausible  to  us, they both  believed  in the  existence of  a master sci- 
ence that served as the claim  to  authority  of a small  planning  elite.  Le 
Corbusier  believed  that  the  scientific  truths   of  modern  construction 
and efficient  design entitled  him to  replace the discordant,  chaotic  his- 
torical  deposit  of urbanism  with  a utopian city.  Lenin believed  that the 
science of  dialectical   materialism   gave the  party  unique  insight  into 
the revolutionary   process  and entitled  it  to claim  the leadership  of  an 
otherwise  disorganized   and ideologically   misled  working   class. Both 
were convinced  that  their  scientific  knowledge  provided   correct,  uni- 
tary  answers  to  how cities   should be  designed  and how  revolutions 
might  be brought  to fruition.   Their  confidence  in  their  method  meant 
that  neither  the science of designing  cities  nor  that of designing  revo- 
lutions  had  much  to  learn  from  the  existing  practices  and  values  of 
their  intended  beneficiaries.   On the contrary,  each  looked forward   to 
refashioning  the human  material  that came under  their  purview.  Both, 
of course,  had the  improvement  of  the human  condition   as their  ulti- 
mate goal, and both  attempted  to attain  it with  methods that  were pro- 
foundly  hierarchical    and authoritarian.    In  the  writings   of both  men, 
metaphors  of the military  and  the machine pervaded;  for Le Corbusier, 
the house  and city  were  machines  for  living,  and  for  Lenin,  the van- 
guard  party   was  a  machine   for  revolution.    Appeals  to  centralized 
forms  of bureaucratic  coordination-especially      the factory  and the pa- 
rade ground-creep     naturally   into their  prose.26 They were, to be sure, 
among  the   most  far-reaching   and   grandiose  figures   of  high   mod- 
ernism,  but they  were at the same time  representative. 


Theory and Practice: The Revolutions of 191 7 

     A  detailed  account  of  the two  Russian  Revolutions   of  19 17 (Feb- 
ruary   and, above  all,  October)  would   take us too  far  afield.  What  is 
possible,  however,  is to  sketch  briefly  some  of the  principal   ways  in 
which  the  actual revolutionary    process resembled  little  the organiza- 
tional  doctrines  advocated  in What Is  to Be Done? The high-modernist 

175
158 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


scheme for  revolution  was  no  more borne  out  in  practice  than  were 
high-modernist plans for  Brasilia  and Chandigarh borne out in  practice. 
     The most discordant   fact about  the Russian  Revolution  was that  it 
was not to any significant  degree brought  about by the vanguard  party, 
the Bolsheviks. What Lenin  did succeed brilliantly   in  doing was in cap- 
turing  the  revolution   once  it  was an  accomplished   fact. As  Hannah 
Arendt  succinctly   put  it,  "The  Bolsheviks   found  power  lying   in  the 
street, and picked it  up."27 E. H. Carr, who wrote one of the earliest and 
most complete studies of the revolutionary   period,  concluded  that "the 
contribution   of Lenin  and the  Bolsheviks  to the overthrow   of czarism 
was negligible"   and that  indeed  "Bolshevism   succeeded to  an empty 
throne."  Nor was  Lenin  the prescient  commander   in chief  who  could 
see the strategic situation  clearly. In  January  19 17, a month before the 
February Revolution,   he wrote  disconsolately,  "We of the older  gener- 
ation may  not see the decisive battles of the  coming  revoluti~n."~~ 
     The  Bolsheviks,  on  the eve  of the  revolution,   did   have a modest 
working-class   base, especially  among  the  unskilled   in  Moscow  and 
Saint Petersburg,  but Social  Revolutionaries,   Mensheviks, anarchists, 
and unaffiliated    workers  predominated.    What  is more,  the  workers 
who were  affiliated  with  the  Bolsheviks  were rarely  amenable  to any- 
thing  like the hierarchical   control  envisioned  in  What Is to Be Done? 
     Lenin's  aspiration  for  revolutionary    practice  was that  the  Bolshe- 
viks would   come to  form  a tight,   disciplined,   command-and-control 
structure.  Nothing  could  have been further  from  actual experience.  In 
all but  one crucial  respect,  the revolution   of 19 17 was very much  like 
the miscarried  revolution   of 1905. Workers  in revolt  took over  the fac- 
tories and  seized municipal  power,  while  in the countryside,   the peas- 
antry  began  seizing  land  and attacking   the  gentry  and  tax  officials. 
Neither  of these activities, either  in 1905 or in  19 17, was brought about 
by the Bolsheviks  or  any other  revolutionary   vanguard.  The workers, 
who spontaneously  formed  soviets to  run  each factory  in  191 7, disre- 
garded  at will   the instructions   of  their  own  Executive   Committee  of 
Soviets, not  to  mention  the  Bolsheviks.  For their   part,  the peasantry 
took the opportunity   created  by a political   vacuum at the  center to re- 
store communal  control  over land  and enact their  local  concept of jus- 
tice.  Most  of the  peasants had  not  even heard  of  the Bolsheviks,   let 
alone presumed  to act on their  orders. 
     What  must forcefully   strike  any reader  of accounts  of the  detailed 
events of late  October  19 17 is the utter confusion  and localized  spon- 
taneity  that  prevailed.29 The very  idea of  centralized  coordination    in 
this political   environment   was implausible.   In the  course of battle,  as 
military   historians  and  astute observers  have always understood,   the 

176
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 159 


command  structure  typically   falters.  Generals lose contact  with  their 
troops and are unable to  follow  the rapidly  changing tides of battle;  the 
commands the  generals do issue are likely  to be irrelevant   by the time 
they reach the battlefield.30  In Lenin's  case, the command-and-control 
structure  could  hardly  falter,  as it had  never existed in  the first  place. 
Ironically,   Lenin  himself   was out  of step  with  the  party's  leadership 
(many of whom  were behind  bars) and was  criticized  on the eve of the 
Revolution  as a reckless putschist. 
     The new  element  in  19 17 that made  a revolutionary    outcome  far 
more likely   than  it  had been in  1905 was  World  War I-specifically, 
the military    collapse  of the Russian  offensive  in  Austria.  Soldiers  by 
the thousands  threw  down  their  weapons  to return   to the cities  or  to 
seize land  in  the  countryside.   The  provisional   government   of  Alek- 
sandr Kerensky  had  little  or nothing   in the way  of coercive  resources 
to deploy   in its  defense.  It  is in  this  sense that  the  Bolsheviks  "suc- 
ceeded to an empty  throne,"  although   Lenin's small  military   uprising 
of October  24 proved a crucial  stroke. What  followed  in the years until 
192 1 is best described as the reconquest, now by  the fledgling  Bolshe- 
vik state,  of Russia. The reconquest  was not simply  a civil  war  against 
the "Whites";  it  was also a war against the autonomous  forces that  had 
seized local  power  in the  Itrev~lution.~'    involved,  first  and foremost, 
a long struggle  to destroy  the independent  power  of the soviets  and to 
impose  piecework,   labor  control,   and the  abrogation   of the  right  to 
strike on  the workers.  In the countryside,  the Bolshevik  state gradually 
imposed political   control  (in place  of communal  power), grain  deliver- 
ies, and, eventually,  collectivization   on the  peasantry.32 The process of 
Bolshevik   state making   entailed  a  great  deal of  violence  against  its 
erstwhile  beneficiaries,  as the uprisings  of Kronstadt,  Tambov, and the 
Maknovchina   in the Ukraine  attested. 
     The model  for the  vanguard party  depicted  so sharply in  What Is to 
Be Done? is an impressive example of executive command  and control. 
Applied   to  the  actual   revolutionary    process,  however,  it   is  a pipe 
dream, bearing  hardly  any relation  to the facts. Where  the model is de- 
scriptively   accurate,  alas, is in the  exercise of state authority   after the 
revolutionary   seizure of power. As it turned  out,  the structure  of power 
that  Lenin hoped  would characterize  the  making of the  revolution  was 
more  closely approximated   by the long-lived   "dictatorship   of the  pro- 
letariat."  And  in this  case, of course, the workers  and peasants did  not 
consent  to the  structure  of power;   the state imposed  it  as a matter  of 
imperative   coordination. 
      Since the  revolutionary   victors   get to  write  the  official   history  of 
how  they  achieved  power, it  matters  little,   in  one sense, how  snugly 

177
160 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


their  account  fits  the historical   facts.  Because most  citizens  come to 
believe the  neatly packaged  account,  whether  or  not it  is accurate,  it 
further  enhances their  confidence  in the  clairvoyance,  determination, 
and power  of their  revolutionary   leaders.  The standard  "just so" story 
of  the  revolutionary    process  is  perhaps   the  ultimate   state  simpli- 
fication.  It serves a variety of political   and aesthetic purposes, which  in 
turn  help  to  account  for  the  form  it  assumes. Surely,  in  the first  in- 
stance, the inheritors   of the  revolutionary   state have a vested interest 
in representing  themselves as the prime animators  of the historical  out- 
come. Such an account  emphasizes their  indispensable  role as leaders 
and missionaries,   and in  the case of  Lenin,  it  accorded best with   the 
stated organizational   ideology of the Bolsheviks.  The authorized  histo- 
ries of revolutions,   as Milovan  Djilas  points  out,  "describe the  revolu- 
tion  as if it  were the  fruit  of the  previously  planned  action  of its  lead- 
er~."3~No  cynicism   or  mendacity   need  be  involved.   It  is  perfectly 
natural   for   leaders  and  generals   to  exaggerate  their   influence   on 
events; that  is the  way the  world   looks from  where  they  sit, and  it  is 
rarely  in the  interest  of their  subordinates  to  contradict  their  picture. 
     After  seizing  state  power,  the victors   have a  powerful   interest  in 
moving  the  revolution   out  of  the  streets and  into  the  museums and 
schoolbooks as quickly  as possible, lest the people decide to  repeat the 
                       A e~perience.~~ schematic account highlighting the decisiveness of a 
handful  of  leaders reinforces   their  legitimacy;   its  emphasis on  cohe- 
sion,  uniformity,   and  central   purpose  makes  it  seem inevitable   and 
therefore,  it  is to be  hoped, permanent.   The slighting   of autonomous 
popular   action   serves the  additional    purpose  of  implying    that  the 
working  class is incapable  of acting  on its own  without  outside leader- 
ship.35 The account is likely to take the  opportunity  to  identify  enemies 
outside  and inside  the  revolution,   singling  out  appropriate  targets  of 
hatred  and suppression. 
     The  standard   account   promoted   by  revolutionary    elites  is  but- 
tressed by the  way in  which  the historical   process  itself  "naturalizes" 
the world,   erasing  evidence  of  its contingency.   Those who  fought  in 
"The  Russian Revolution"   discovered  this  fact about  themselves only 
later, when  the revolution   was an accomplished  fact. In  the same way, 
none of the  historical  participants   in,  say, World War I or  the Battle  of 
the Bulge, not  to mention  the Reformation  or the Renaissance, knew at 
the time  that they were  participating   in anything  that  could be so sum- 
marily  described.  And because things do turn out  in a certain way  after 
all, with   certain patterns  or causes that are clear  in retrospect,  it is not 
surprising  that  the outcome  should sometimes  seem inevitable. Every- 
one forgets  that it  might  all  have turned  out quite  differently.36 In that 

178
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 16 1 


forgetting,  another  step in naturalizing   the  revolutionary   triumph   has 
been taken.37 
     When victors  such  as Lenin  get to impose  their  theories of  revolu- 
tion,  not so much  on the  revolutionary   events themselves,  but  on the 
postrevolutionary    official   story,  the  narrative   typically    stresses the 
agency, purpose, and genius of the  revolutionary   leadership  and mini- 
mizes                                Thecontingen~y.~~ final irony, then, was that the official story of 
the Bolshevik  Revolution  was made, for  more than  sixty years, to  con- 
form  closely to the utopian  directions   outlined  in  What Is to Be Done? 


The Lenin of State and Revolution 

     The later  Lenin  of  State and Revolution   is often juxtaposed   to the 
Lenin  of What Is  to Be Done? to demonstrate  a substantial  shift  in  his 
view of  the relationship   between  the vanguard  party  and  the masses. 
Without  a  doubt,  much  of  Lenin's  tone  in  the  pamphlet,   written   at 
breakneck  speed in August  and September  of  19 17-after   the  Febru- 
ary Revolution  and just  before  the October  Revolution-is     difficult   to 
square with   the text  of  1903. There  were  important   tactical   reasons 
why, in  19 17, Lenin might  have wanted  to encourage  as much auton- 
omous popular  revolutionary   action  as possible. He and other  Bolshe- 
viks were  concerned  that  many workers,   now  masters of  their  facto- 
ries, and many Russian urbanites  would  lose their revolutionary   ardor, 
allowing  Kerensky's provisional   government  to gain control   and block 
the Bolsheviks.   For Lenin's  revolutionaries,    everything  depended  on 
destabilizing  the  Kerensky  regime,  even if the  crowds  were not  at  all 
under  Bolshevik  discipline.  No  wonder  that, even  in early  November, 
before  the Bolsheviks   had  consolidated  power,   Lenin  sounded  very 
much  like  the  anarchists:   "Socialism   is not  created  by  orders  from 
above. State bureaucratic  automatism  is  alien to its  spirit;  socialism  is 
alive, creative-the     creation  of the  popular  masses them~elves."~9 
     While  State and Revolution has an egalitarian  and utopian  tone that 
echoes Marx's picture  of Communism,  what is striking   for our  purpose 
is the degree to which  Lenin's high-modernist   convictions  still  pervade 
the text. First,  Lenin  leaves no doubt that  the application   of state coer- 
cive power   is the  only  way to  build  socialism.   He  openly  avows the 
need for  violence  after  the  seizure  of power:   "The  proletariat   needs 
state power, the  centralized  organization   of force,  the organization   of 
violence,  . . . for  the purpose  of guiding  the great  mass of the  popula- 
tion-the     peasantry, the petite  bourgeoisie,  the semi-proletarians-in 
the work  of organizing  Socialist  economy."40 Once again Marxism pro- 
vides the ideas and  training   that alone  create a brain  for  the  working 

179
162 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


masses: "By  educating  a workers'   party,  Marxism   educates the  van- 
guard of  the proletariat,    capable of  assuming  power  and leading  the 
whole people  to Socialism,  of directing   and organizing  the new  order, 
of being teacher, guide and  leader of all  the toiling  and exploited  in the 
task of building  up their  social  life without  the bourgeoisie  and against 
the Thebo~rgeoisie."~~  assumption is that the social life  of the working 
class will  be  organized  either  by the  bourgeoisie  or  by the  vanguard 
party, but  never by members of  the working  class themselves. 
     At  the  same time,   Lenin  waxes  eloquent  about  a new  society  in 
which  politics   will   have disappeared   and  in which   virtually   anyone 
could  be entrusted  with  the  administration    of things.  The models  for 
Lenin's  optimism   were  precisely   the  great  human   machines  of  his 
time:  industrial  organizations   and large  bureaucracies.  In his  picture, 
the growth  of  capitalism  has built  a nonpolitical    technostructure   that 
rolls  along of its accord:  "Capitalist  culture  has created large-scale pro- 
duction,  factories,  railways,  the postal service, telephones,  etc., and on 
this  basis the great majority   of functions   of the old  'state power'   have 
become so simplified  and  can be reduced to such simple  operations  of 
registration,   filing,   and checking  that  they  would  be quite  within  the 
reach of  every literate  person,  and it  will  be possible to  perform  them 
for  working   men's wages,  which  circumstance   can  (and  must)  strip 
those functions   of every shadow  of privilege  and  every appearance  of 
official  grandeur."42 Lenin conjures  up a vision  of the perfect  technical 
rationality    of modern   production.   Once the  "simple   operations"  ap- 
propriate   to  each niche  in  the established  division   of labor  are  mas- 
tered,  there  is quite  literally   nothing  more  to discuss.  The revolution 
ousts the bourgeoisie  from  the bridge  of  this "ocean  liner," installs  the 
vanguard  party, and sets a new course, but the jobs of the vast crew  are 
unchanged.   Lenin's  picture   of  the  technical   structure,   it  should  be 
noted,  is entirely   static.  The forms  of  production   are  either  set or, if 
they do  change, the changes cannot  require  skills  of a different   order. 
     The utopian  promise  of this  capitalist-created  state of  affairs is that 
anyone could  take part  in the administration    of the state. The develop- 
ment  of capitalism  had produced  massive, socialized, bureaucratic  ap- 
paratuses  as well as the "training   and disciplining   of millions   of work- 
                      Takener~."~~ together, these huge, centralized bureaucracies were the 
key to the new  world.  Lenin had seen them at work  in the wartime   mo- 
bilization   of Germany under  Rathenau's guiding  hand. Science and the 
division   of labor  had  spawned  an institutional    order  of technical   ex- 
pertise  in  which  politics   and quarrels  were  beside the point.  Modern 
production   provided  the basis  of a technically  necessary dictatorship. 
 "In  regard  to  .  . .  the importance   of  individual    dictatorial   powers," 

180
                                                                    The Revolutionary Party 163 


Lenin observed, "it must be said that large-scale machine industry- 
which is precisely . . . the foundation of socialism[-] . . . calls for ab- 
solute and strict unity of will, which  directs the joint labours of hun- 
dreds, thousands and tens of thousands of people. . . . But how can 
strict unity of will  be ensured? By thousands subordinating their will 
to the will  of one. . . . We must learn to combine the public-meeting 
democracy of the working people-turbulent, surging, overflowing its 
banks like a spring flood-with  iron discipline while at work, with un- 
questioning obedience to the will of a single person, the Soviet leader, 
while at work."44 
     In this respect, Lenin joins many of his capitalist contemporaries in 
his enthusiasm for Fordist and Taylorist production technology. What 
was rejected by Western trade unions of the time as a "de-skilling" of 
an artisanal workforce was embraced by Lenin as the key to rational 
state planning.45 There is, for Lenin, a single, objectively correct, effi- 
cient answer to all questions of how to rationally design production or 
admini~tration.~~ 
     Lenin goes on to imagine, in a Fourierist vein, a vast national syn- 
dicate that will virtually  run itself. He sees it as a technical net whose 
mesh will confine workers to the appropriate routines by its rationality 
and the discipline of habit. In a chillingly Orwellian passage-a warn- 
ing, perhaps, to anarchist or  lumpen elements who might resist its 
logic-Lenin    indicates how remorseless the system will be: "Escape 
from  this  national accounting  will  inevitably  become increasingly 
difficult  . . . and will probably be accompanied by such swift and se- 
vere punishment (for the armed workers are men of practical life, not 
sentimental intellectuals and they will scarcely allow anyone to trifle 
with them), that very soon the necessity of observing the simple, fun- 
damental rules of social life in common will have become a habit."47 
     Except for the fact that Lenin's utopia is more egalitarian and is set 
in the context of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the parallels with 
Le Corbusier's high modernism are conspicuous. The social order is 
conceived as a vast factory or office-a "smoothly humming machine," 
as Le Corbusier would have put it, in which "each man would live in 
an ordered relation  to the  whole." Neither Lenin  nor Le Corbusier 
were unique in sharing this vision, although they were exceptionally 
influential.  The parallels serve as a reminder of the extent to which 
much of the socialist left as well as the right were in thrall to the tem- 
plate of modem industrial organization. Comparable utopias, a "dream 
of authoritarian,  military,  egalitarian, bureaucratic socialism which 
was openly admiring of Prussian values," could be found in Marx, in 
Saint-Simon, and in the science fiction that was widely popular in Rus- 

181
164 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


sia at the  time,  especially a translation   of  Edward  Bellamy's  Looking 
HighBack~ard.~~   modernism  was politically    polymorphous;   it  could 
appear in  any political  disguise,  even an anarchist  one. 


The Lenin of The Agrarian Question 

     In  order  to clinch  the argument   for Lenin's  consistently  high-mod- 
ernist  stance, we need only  turn  to his writings   on  agriculture,   a field 
in which  high-modernist   views  were  hotly contested.  Most  of our evi- 
dence can be drawn  from  a single  work,  The Agrarian  Question, writ- 
ten between  1901 and 1 907.49 
     This  text was  an unremitting    condemnation   of small-scale  family 
farming  and a celebration  of  the gigantic,  highly  mechanized  forms of 
modern  agriculture.   For Lenin  it  was not just  a question  of aesthetics 
of scale  but  a question   of historical    inevitability.   The  difference  be- 
tween  low-technology    family   farming   and  large-scale,  mechanized 
farming  was precisely the difference  between the hand-operated  looms 
of cottage-industry  weavers  on one hand and the mechanized  looms of 
large  textile  factories  on the  other. The  first  mode of  production   was 
simply  doomed.  Lenin's  analogy  was borrowed   from  Marx,  who  fre- 
quently  used it  as a way  of saying  that  the hand  loom  gives you  feu- 
dalism  and  the power  loom  gives  you capitalism.   So  suggestive was 
this imagery  that  Lenin  fell  back on it  in  other contexts,  claiming,   for 
example,  in What Is  to Be Done? that  his opponents,  the  Economists, 
were using  "handicraft   methods," whereas  the Bolsheviks  operated as 
professional  (modern,  trained)  revolutionaries. 
     Peasant forms  of  production-not      to  mention  the  peasants them- 
selves-were,    for  Lenin, hopelessly backward.  They were  mere histor- 
ical  vestiges that  would   undoubtedly  be  swept  away, as the  cottage- 
industry  weavers  had been,  by the  agrarian  equivalent  of  large-scale 
machine  industry.  "Two decades have passed," he wrote, "and machin- 
ery has driven  the small producer  from  still  another  of his last refuges, 
as if telling  those  who have ears to  hear and eyes to see that the econ- 
omist must  always look forward,  towards  technical  progress, or else be 
left  behind  at once, for  he who  will   not look  ahead turns  his  back on 
history;  there  is not and  there cannot  be any middle  path."50 Here and 
in  other writings   Lenin  denounced all  the cultivation   and social  prac- 
tices  associated with  the  customary,  communal,  three-field   system of 
land  allotments  that still  pertained  in  much of Russia. In  this case, the 
idea  of common  property   prevented  the  full  development  of  capital- 
ism,  which,  in  turn,  was  a condition   of revolution.   "Modern   agricul- 
tural  technique," he concluded,  "demands  that all  the conditions  of the 

182
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 165 


ancient,  conservative,   barbarous,  ignorant,   and  pauper   methods  of 
economy on  peasant  allotments  be transformed.    The three-field   sys- 
tem, the primitive   implements,   the patriarchical    impecuniosity   of the 
tiller, the  routine  methods of stock breeding  and crass naive ignorance 
of the conditions   and requirements   of the  market  must  all be thrown 
overb~ard."~ 
     The suitability   of a logic drawn  from  manufacturing   and applied  to 
agriculture,   however, was very  much contested.  Any number  of  econ- 
omists had carried  out detailed  studies of labor  allocation,  production, 
and  expenditures  for   rural  producer   households.   While  some were 
perhaps ideologically   committed   to developing  a case for the produc- 
tive  efficiency  of  small property,   they  had a wealth   of empirical   evi- 
dence that had to be confr~nted.~~They argued that  the nature of much 
agricultural    production   meant  that  the economic   returns  of  mecha- 
nization  were minimal  when  compared to the returns  of intensification 
(which  focused on manuring,  careful  breeding,  and so on). The returns 
to scale as well, they  argued, were minimal   or negative  beyond the av- 
erage acreage of the  family  farm.  Lenin  might  have taken  these argu- 
ments less seriously   had they  all been  based on Russian  data, where 
the backwardness  of rural  infrastructure    impeded mechanization   and 
commercial  production.   But most of  the data came from  Germany and 
Austria,  comparatively   developed countries,   where the  small  farmers 
in  question   were  highly   commercialized   and  responsive   to  market 
forces.53 
     Lenin  set out to refute  the data purporting   to show  the efficiency  or 
competitiveness  of family  agriculture.  He  exploited the inconsistencies 
of their   empirical  evidence  and introduced   data  from  other  scholars, 
both  Russian and German,  to  make the case against  them. Where  the 
evidence  seemed unassailable,  Lenin  claimed  that  the  small  farmers 
who  did  survive  managed to  do so only  by starving  and  overworking 
themselves,  their  wives and  children,  their   cows, and  their  plow  ani- 
mals. Whatever  profits the small  farms produced were  the consequence 
of overwork   and underconsumption.   Although  such patterns  of  "auto- 
exploitation"   were not  uncommon  within   peasant families,  Lenin's ev- 
idence  was  not  completely   convincing.   For  his (and  Marx's)   under- 
standing  of  modes of production,   the  survival  of artisanal   handiwork 
and small  farming  had to be an incidental  anachronism.   We have since 
learned  how efficient  and tenacious  small-scale production   can be, but 
Lenin  was in  no doubt  about what  the future  held.  "This  inquiry  dem- 
onstrates  the  technical   superiority   of large-scale  production   in  agri- 
culture   .  . . [and]  the  overwork   and  underconsumption    of the  small 
peasant  and his transformation    into  a regular  or  day-labourer  for  the 

183
166 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


landlord.   . . . The  facts prove  incontestably   that  under  the  capitalist 
system the position  of the small  peasant in  agriculture   is in every way 
analogous to that  of the handicraftsman   in industry."S4 
     The Agrarian  Question  also allows   us to  appreciate  an additional 
facet of  Lenin's high  modernism:   his celebration   of the  most modern 
technology  and,  above all,                             Heelectri~ity.~~ was famous for claiming 
that "Communism   is Soviet Power plus the Electrification    of the whole 
countryside."  Electricity    had, for  him   and for  most  other  high  mod- 
ernists, a nearly  mythical   appeal. That  appeal had to  do, I think,   with 
the unique qualities  of electricity   as a form of  power. Unlike  the mech- 
anisms of  steam power, direct   waterpower,  and  the internal   combus- 
tion engine,  electricity  was silent,  precise, and  well-nigh  invisible.  For 
Lenin  and many others,  electricity   was magical.  Its  great promise  for 
the modernization   of rural  life  was that,  once transmission  lines  were 
laid  down, power   could be delivered   over long  distances and  was in- 
stantly available  wherever  it was  needed and in the  quantity  required. 
Lenin  imagined,   incorrectly,   that  it would   replace  the internal   com- 
bustion  engine in most  farm operations.   "Machinery  powered  by elec- 
tricity  runs  more smoothly  and precisely, and for  that reason it  is more 
convenient  to use in  thrashing,   ploughing,  milking,   cutting   fodder."56 
By  placing  power  within    reach  of an  entire  people,  the  state  could 
eliminate  what  Marx termed  the  "idiocy  of rural  life." 
     Electrification    was,  for  Lenin,  the  key to  breaking  the  pattern   of 
petit-bourgeois   landholding   and hence the  only way  to extirpate   "the 
roots of capitalism"   in the countryside,  which  was "the  foundation,  the 
basis, of the internal   enemy." The enemy "depends on small-scale  pro- 
duction,  and there  is only one way  of undermining   it, namely,  to place 
the economy  of the country,  including   agriculture,  on  a new technical 
basis, that of  modern large-scale  production.   Only electricity   provides 
that basis."57 
     Much  of the attraction  of electricity   for Lenin  had to do with  its per- 
fection,  its mathematical   precision.   Man's work  and even the  work  of 
the steam-driven  plow or  threshing  machine were  imperfect;  the oper- 
ation  of an electric  machine,  in contrast,  seemed certain,  precise,  and 
continuous.  Electricity   was  also, it should  be added,                              Itcentrali~ing.~~ 
produced  a  visible  network   of transmission   lines  emanating   from  a 
central  power  station   from  which  the  flow  of  power  was generated, 
distributed,   and  controlled.    The nature   of  electricity   suited  Lenin's 
utopian,  centralizing   vision  perfectly.  A map of electric  lines  from  the 
generating   plant  would  look   like  the  spokes of  a centralized   trans- 
portation   hub  like  Paris (see chapter   l),  except  that  the direction   of 
flow was  one way. Transmission lines blanketed  the nation  with  power 

184
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 167 


in a way  that  overcame geography.  Electricity   equalized  access to an 
essential  part  of   the  modern  world    and,  not  incidentally,    brought 
light-both      literally   and culturally-to       the narod  (literally,  the  "dark 
people").59 Finally,  electricity   allowed  and  indeed  required  planning 
and calculation.   The  way that  electricity   worked   was very  much  the 
way that  Lenin hoped  the power  of the socialist  state would  work. 
     For  Lenin,  much  the same developmental   logic  applied  to the  top 
elite  of the  vanguard  party,  the  factory,  and the  farm.  Professionals, 
technicians,  and  engineers  would  replace  amateurs  as leaders.  Cen- 
tralized  authority   based on science  would  prevail.  As with  Le  Corbu- 
sier, the  degree of  functional   specificity  within   the  organization,   the 
degree of order  provided  by  routines  and the  substitutability   of units, 
and the  extent  of mechanization   were  all  yardsticks  of  superior   effi- 
ciency  and rationality.    In  the case of  farms  and factories,   the larger 
and  more  capital   intensive   they  were,  the  better.  One  can  already 
glimpse  in  Lenin's conception   of  agriculture   the mania  for  machine- 
tractor   stations,  the establishment   of  large state  farms  and  eventual 
collectivization    (after   Lenin's  death),   and  even the   high-modernist 
spirit  that  would   lead to  such  vast colonization   schemes as  Khrush- 
chev's Virgin   Lands initiative.   At  the same time,  Lenin's  views have a 
strong  Russian  lineage. They  bear a  family  resemblance  to  Peter the 
Great's  project  for  Saint  Petersburg   and to  the huge  model  military 
colonies  set up by Alexei Arakcheev  with  the patronage  of Alexander  I 
in the early  nineteenth  century -both    designed to drag  Russia into the 
modern  world. 
     By  focusing  on Lenin's high-modernist   side, we  risk simplifying   an 
exceptionally  complex  thinker  whose ideas and actions  were rich  with 
crosscurrents.   During  the  revolution   he was  capable of  encouraging 
the communal   seizure  of land,  autonomous   action,  and the  desire of 
rural  Soviets  "to  learn  from their   own mistakes."60 He decided, at  the 
end of a devastating civil  war  and a grain-procurement   crisis, to  shelve 
collectivization   and encourage  small-scale production   and petty trade. 
Some have suggested that in his last writings he was more favorably  dis- 
posed to peasant  farming  and,  it is speculated,  would  not have  forced 
through  the brutal   collectivization   that  Stalin ordered  in  1929. 
     Despite the  force of these qualifications, there is little  reason, I think, 
to  believe that  Lenin   ever abandoned  the  core of  his high-modernist 
 conviction^.^^ This is  apparent  even in how  he phrases his tactical   re- 
treat   following   the  Kronstadt   uprising    in  1921  and  the  continuing 
urban  food crisis:  "Until  we have remolded  the peasant, . . . until  large- 
scale machinery  has recast him,  we must  assure him  of the possibility 
of running  his  economy without  restrictions.   We must find forms  of co- 

185
168 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


existence with   the small  farmer,   . .  . since the  remaking of  the small 
farmer, the reshaping   of his whole  psychology   and all  his habits,  is  a 
task requiring                               Ifgenerati~ns."~~this  is a tactical retreat, the acknowl- 
edgment that  the transformation   of the  peasants will  take generations 
does not exactly  sound like  the words  of  a general who  expects to  re- 
sume the  offensive  soon. On the  other  hand,  Lenin's  faith  in  mecha- 
nization  as the key to  the transformation    of a recalcitrant    human na- 
ture  is undiminished.   There  is a  new modesty-the      fruit  of  effective 
peasant resistance-about     how  tortuous  and  long the  path to  a mod- 
ern,  socialized  agriculture   will   be, but  the vista,  once  the journey   is 
made, looks the same. 


Luxemburg:   Physician   and  Midwife    to the  Revolution 

Rosa Luxemburg  was more than merely  a contemporary  of  Lenin.  She 
was an equally  committed   revolutionary   and Marxist   who  was assas- 
sinated, along  with  Karl  Liebknecht,  in  Berlin  in  19 19 at the behest of 
her less revolutionary    allies  on the  left.  Although  Jane  Jacobs was a 
critic  of  Le Corbusier  and high-modernist   urban  planning   in general, 
Le  Corbusier  had  almost  certainly   never  heard  of  Jacobs before  he 
died. Lenin, on the  other hand, had met Luxemburg.  They wrote largely 
for the  same audience and  in the knowledge   of each other's  opinions, 
and indeed  Luxemburg   specifically   refuted  Lenin's  arguments  about 
the vanguard party  and its  relation  to the proletariat   in a revolutionary 
setting. We will  chiefly  be concerned  with  the essays in which  Luxem- 
burg most directly   confronts  Lenin's high-modernist   views: "Organiza- 
tional  Questions of  Russian Social  Democracy"   (1 904), "Mass-Strike, 
Party, and Trade Unions" (1906), and  her posthumously  published "The 
Russian Revolution"  (written   in  19 18, first published in  192 1, after the 
Kronstadt  uprising). 
     Luxemburg   differed  most  sharply  with   Lenin  in her  relative  faith 
in  the autonomous   creativity   of the  working   class.  Her  optimism  in 
"Mass-Strike,  Party, and  Trade Unions"  is partly   due to the fact that  it 
was written,    unlike   What Is   to Be  Done? after   the  object  lesson of 
worker  militancy  provided  by the  1905 revolution.  Luxemburg  was es- 
pecially  struck  by  the massive  response of the  Warsaw  proletariat   to 
the revolution   of  1905. On the other  hand,  "Organizational   Questions 
of Russian  Social  Democracy"  was  written   before the  events of 1905 
and in  direct  reply to  What Is to Be Done? This  essay was a key text in 
the refusal  of  the  Polish party  to  place  itself  under  the central   disci- 
pline  of the Russian Social  Democratic  Party.63 
     In  emphasizing   the  differences   between  Lenin   and Luxemburg, 

186
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 169 


we must  not  overlook  the  ideological  common   ground  they  took for 
granted.  They  shared,  for  example,  Marxist   assumptions   about  the 
contradictions   of capitalist   development  and the inevitability    of revo- 
lution.  They were  both  enemies of  gradualism   and of  anything  more 
than tactical  compromises  with  nonrevolutionary    parties.  Even at the 
strategic level, they both argued  for the importance  of a vanguard party 
on the  grounds  that   the vanguard   party  was  more  likely  to  see the 
whole situation  (the "totality"),   whereas most workers were  more likely 
to see only their  local  situation  and their  particular    interests. Neither 
Lenin  nor  Luxemburg   had  what  might   be called  a  sociology  of  the 
-.party. That  is, it did  not  occur  to them  that   the intelligentsia    of the 
party  might  have interests  that did  not  coincide  with  the workers'   in- 
terests, however  defined. They were  quick  to see a sociology of  trade- 
union  bureaucracies  but  not a sociology  of the  revolutionary   Marxist 
party. 
     Luxemburg,   in fact,  was not  above using  the metaphor  of  the fac- 
tory manager, as did Lenin,  to explain why  the worker  might  be wise to 
follow  instructions   in order  to  contribute  to  a larger  result not  imme- 
diately  apparent  from   where  he stood.  Where  the  difference  arises, 
however, is in the lengths  to which  this logic  is pursued. For Lenin,  the 
totality  was exclusively  in the  hands of the vanguard  party,  which  had 
a virtual  monopoly  of knowledge.  He  imagined  an all-seeing  center- 
an eye in the sky, as it were-which      formed  the basis for  strictly   hier- 
archical  operations  in which  the proletariat  became mere  foot soldiers 
or  pawns.  For Luxemburg,   the  party  might  well   be more  farsighted 
than  the workers,   but  it  would  nevertheless  be constantly   surprised 
and taught  new lessons by those whom  it presumed  to lead. 
     Luxemburg   viewed  the  revolutionary    process  as being  far  more 
complex and  unpredictable  than  did Lenin,  just as Jacobs saw the cre- 
ation  of successful  urban  neighborhoods   as being  far more  complex 
and  mysterious   than  did  Le  Corbusier.  The  metaphors   Luxemburg 
used, as we shall  see, were indicative.   Eschewing  military,   engineer- 
ing, and factory  parallels,  she wrote  more frequently   of growth,  devel- 
opment,  experience, and learning.64 
     The idea  that  the vanguard  party  could  either   order  or prohibit    a 
mass strike,   the  way  a commander   might   order  his  soldiers  to  the 
front   or confine   them  to  barracks,  struck   Luxemburg   as ludicrous. 
Any attempt  to  so engineer  a strike  was both  unrealistic   and morally 
inadmissible.    She rejected   the  instrumentalism     that  underlay   this 
view.  "Both  tendencies   [ordering   or  prohibiting    a mass strike]   pro- 
ceed from  the same, pure anarchist   [sic] notion  that  the mass strike  is 
merely  a technical   means of struggle  which   can be  'decided'  or  'for- 

187
170 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


bidden'  at pleasure,  according   to one's knowledge  and  conscience, a 
kind of  pocket-knife  which  one keeps clasped in  his packet,  'ready for 
all emergencies,'  or  decides to unclasp  and use."65A  general strike, or 
a revolution  for  that  matter,  was a complex  social event involving   the 
wills  and  knowledge  of many  human  agents,  of which   the vanguard 
party was only  one element. 


Revolution as a Living Process 

     Luxemburg   looked  on  strikes  and  political   struggles  as dialecti- 
cal, historical   processes. The structure   of the economy  and the work- 
force  helped  to  shape,  but  never  determine,   the  options   available. 
Thus, if industry   was small scale and  geographically  scattered,  strikes 
would typically  be small  and scattered as well. Each set of strikes, how- 
ever, forced changes in  the structure  of capital.  If  workers  won higher 
wages, for example, the  increases might  provoke consolidations   in the 
industry,  mechanization,  and new patterns  of supervision,  all  of which 
would  influence   the  character  of  the  next round   of strikes.  A  strike 
would  also, of  course, teach  the workforce   new lessons and  alter  the 
character  of its  cohesion  and Thisleader~hip.~~  insistence on process 
and human  agency served Luxemburg   as a warning  against a narrow 
view of  tactics. A strike  or  a revolution   was not simply  an end toward 
which  tactics  and command  ought  to be directed;  the process leading 
to it was at the same time shaping  the character  of the proletariat.  How 
the revolution   was made mattered  as much as whether  it was made at 
all, for  the process itself  had heavy consequences. 
     Luxemburg   found  Lenin's desire  to turn  the vanguard  party  into  a 
military   general  staff for  the  working   class to be both  utterly  unreal- 
istic  and morally   distasteful.  His  hierarchical    logic  ignored  the inev- 
itable  autonomy   of the  working   class (singly   and in  groups),  whose 
own  interests  and  actions  could  never  be machine-tooled   into  strict 
conformity.  What  is more, even if  such discipline  were conceivable,  by 
imposing  it  the party would   deprive itself  of the independent,  creative 
force  of a proletariat   that  was, after  all,  the subject  of the revolution. 
Against  Lenin's  aspiration    for  control   and  order  Luxemburg   juxta- 
posed the inevitably  disorderly, tumultuous,   and living tableau  of large- 
scale social action.  "Instead  of a fixed  and hollow  scheme of sober po- 
litical   action   executed  with   a prudent   plan  decided  by  the  highest 
committees," she wrote, in  what was a clear reference to Lenin,  "we see 
a vibrant  part  of life  in flesh  and blood  which  cannot be cut  out of the 
larger  frame of  the revolution:  The mass strike  is bound by a thousand 
veins  to  all  parts  of  the rev~lution."~~ When   contrasting   her  under- 

188
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 1 7 1 


standing to  Lenin's, she consistently reached  for metaphors  from  com- 
plex, organic processes, which  cannot be arbitrarily    carved up without 
threatening  the vitality   of the organism  itself.  The idea that  a rational, 
hierarchical   executive  committee  might  deploy  its proletarian   troops 
as it wished  not  only  was irrelevant   to real  political   life  but was  also 
dead and hollow.68 
     In  her  refutation   of  What Is  to Be Done?  Luxemburg   made clear 
that the  cost of  centralized  hierarchy   lay  in the  loss of creativity   and 
initiative   from   below:  "The  'discipline'    Lenin  has  in  mind   is by  no 
means only  implanted  in  the proletariat   by the factory,  but  equally by 
the barracks,  by the modern  bureaucracy,  by the entire  mechanism  of 
the centralized  bourgeois  state apparatus. . . . The ultracentrism   advo- 
cated by Lenin  is permeated in  its very essence by the sterile spirit  of a 
nightwatchman   (Nachtwachtergeist) rather  than  by a positive  and cre- 
ative spirit.  He concentrated  mostly on controlling   the party, not on fer- 
tilizing  it,  on narrowing   it down,  not developing it,  on regimenting  and 
not unifying   it."69 
     The  core  of the  disagreement   between  Lenin  and  Luxemburg   is 
caught best in  the figures of speech they each use. Lenin  comes across 
as a rigid schoolmaster with  quite  definite lessons to convey-a    school- 
master who  senses the unruliness  of his pupils  and  wants desperately 
to keep them  in  line for  their  own  good.  Luxemburg  sees that unruli- 
ness as well, but she takes it for  a sign of vitality,  a potentially  valuable 
resource;  she fears that  an overly  strict  schoolmaster  will  destroy  the 
pupils' enthusiasm  and leave a sullen, dispirited  classroom where noth- 
ing  is really  learned.  She argues  elsewhere, in  fact,  that  the German 
Social  Democrats,  by their  constant  efforts at  close control  and  disci- 
pline,  have demoralized   the  German  working   class.70 Lenin sees the 
possibility   that  the pupils   might  influence   a weak,  timorous  teacher 
and deplores it  as a dangerous counterrevolutionary   step. Luxemburg, 
for  whom  the classroom  bespeaks a genuine collaboration,    implicitly 
allows  for  the possibility   that the  teacher  might just  learn  some valu- 
able lessons from  the pupils. 
     Once Luxemburg  began thinking  of the revolution   as analogous to a 
complex  natural   process, she  concluded  that  the  role of  a vanguard 
party  was inevitably  limited.  Such processes are far too complicated  to 
be well  understood,  let alone directed  or planned  in  advance. She was 
deeply impressed  by the autonomous  popular  initiatives  taken  all over 
Russia after the shooting of the  crowd before the Winter  Palace in 1905. 
Her  description,  which   I quote at  length, invokes  metaphors  from  na- 
ture  to convey her conviction  that  centralized  control  is an illusion. 

189
172 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


    As the Russian Revolution r190.51 shows to us, the mass strike is such a 
    changeable phenomenon that it  reflects in itself  all phases of political 
    and  economic struggle, all  stages and moments of the revolution.  Its 
    applicability,   its effectiveness, and the  moments of its  origin  change 
    continually.  It  suddenly  opens new, broad perspectives of revolution 
    just where it  seemed to have come to a narrow pass; and it disappoints 
    where one thought he could reckon on it  in full  certitude. Now it flows 
     like a broad billow  over the whole land.  now it divides  itself into a    uei- 
     gantic net of thin streams; now it bubbles forth from  under the ground 
     like a fresh spring, now it  trickles flat along the ground.  . . . All [forms 
     of popular struggle] run through one another, next to each other, across 
     one another, flow  in and  over one another;  it  is an eternal,  moving, 
     changing sea of  appearance^.^' 

     The mass strike,  then, was not  a tactical  invention  of the  vanguard 
party to be used at the  appropriate  moment.  It  was, rather,  the "living 
pulse-beat of  the  revolution   and  at the  same time  its  most powerful 
driving-wheel,   . . . the phenomenal  form  of the proletarian   struggle  in 
the  rev~lution."~~ From   Luxemburg's   perspective,  Lenin   must  have 
seemed like an engineer  with  hopes of  damming  a wild  river  in order 
to release it at a single  stroke in  a massive flood that would  be the rev- 
olution.  She believed  that  the  "flood"  of the  mass strike  could  not be 
predicted  or controlled;   its course  could not  be much affected  by pro- 
fessional  revolutionists,   although   they  could,  as Lenin   actually  did, 
ride  that  flood  to  power.  Luxemburg's   understanding   of the  revolu- 
tionary  process,  curiously   enough,  provided   a better   description   of 
how Lenin  and the Bolsheviks came to  power than  did the utopian  sce- 
nario  in What Is to Be Done? 
     A grasp  of political   conflict   as process allowed   Luxemburg  to  see 
well beyond what  Lenin  considered  to be failures and dead ends. Writ- 
ing of 1905, she emphasized that  "after every foaming  wave of political 
action  a fructifying   deposit  remains  from  which   a thousand  stalks of 
economic struggle  shoot forth."73 The analogy she drew to organic pro- 
cesses conveyed both their autonomy and their  vulnerability.  To extract 
from  the living  tissue of the proletarian   movement  a particular  kind  of 
strike  for instrumental    use would  threaten  the whole  organism.  With 
Lenin  in  mind  she wrote,   "If  the  contemplative   theory  proposes  the 
artificial   dissection of  the mass strike to  get at the 'pure  political  mass 
strike,'  then  by this  dissection,  as with  any  other, it  will   not perceive 
the phenomenon in  its living  essence, but will kill  it  all together."74 Lux- 
emburg,  then, saw  the workers'  movement  in  much  the same light  as 
Jacobs saw the city:  as an intricate   social  organism whose  origin,  dy- 
namics,  and future  were but  dimly  understood.  To nevertheless inter- 
vene and dissect the  workers'  movement  was to kill   it, just  as carving 

190
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 173 


up the  city  along  strict  functional    lines produced   a lifeless,  taxider- 
mists  city. 
     If  Lenin approached  the proletariat   as an engineer  approached his 
raw materials,  with  a view  toward  shaping them  to his purposes,  Lux- 
emburg approached  the proletariat   as a physician would.  Like  any pa- 
tient, the  proletariat   had its  own constitution,    which  limited  the  kind 
of interventions   that  could be made.  The physician  needed to  respect 
the patient's constitution   and assist according  to its potential  strengths 
and  weaknesses. Finally,   the  autonomy   and  history   of  the   patient 
would  inevitably  influence   the outcome.  The proletariat   could  not  be 
reshaped from  the  ground  up  and fitted  neatly  into  a predetermined 
design. 
     But  the major,  recurrent   theme of  Luxemburg's  criticism   of Lenin 
and the  Bolsheviks  generally  was  that  their  dictatorial    methods and 
their  mistrust   of the  proletariat    made for  bad  educational   policy.  It 
thwarted  the  development  of the  mature,  independent  working   class 
that was  necessary to the revolution   and  to the creation   of socialism. 
Thus she  attacked  both  the  German  and  Russian  revolutionists    for 
substituting   the  ego of  the vanguard   party  for  the  ego of  the  prole- 
tariat-a     substitution    that  ignored  the fact  that  the  objective  was to 
create a self-conscious  workers'  movement,   not just  to use the  prole- 
tariat  as instruments.  Like  a confident  and sympathetic   guardian,  she 
anticipated   false steps as part  of the learning   process. "However,   the 
nimble   acrobat,"   she charged,   referring    to  the  Social   Democratic 
Party, "fails  to  see that the  true  subject to  whom  this  role  of director 
falls is the  collective  ego of the working  class which  insists  on its right 
to make its own  mistakes and learn  the historical   dialectic  by itself.  Fi- 
nally,  we must  frankly   admit  to  ourselves  that  the errors   made by  a 
truly   revolutionary    labor  movement  are  historically    infinitely   more 
fruitful    and valuable   than  the infallibility     of  the  best of  all  possible 
'central   committees.' 
     Nearly  fifteen  years  later, a year  after the  October  19 17 Bolshevik 
seizure  of  power,  Luxemburg   was  attacking   Lenin   in  precisely  the 
same terms.  Her warnings,   so soon after  the revolution,   about the  di- 
rection  in  which  the  dictatorship   of the  proletariat   was headed  seem 
prophetic. 
      She believed  that  Lenin  and  Trotsky  had completely   corrupted   a 
proper  understanding   of  the dictatorship   of  the proletariat.   To her,  it 
meant  rule  by the whole  proletariat,   which  required   the broadest  po- 
litical   freedoms for  all  workers  (though  not for  enemy classes) so that 
they  could bring  their  influence  and wisdom  to bear on the building   of 
socialism.  It  did not  mean, as Lenin and  Trotsky assumed, that  a small 

191
174 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


circle  of party  leaders would  exercise dictatorial    power merely  in  the 
name of the proletariat.   Trotsky's proposal  that the  constituent  assem- 
bly not convene because circumstances  had changed  since its election 
struck Luxemburg   as a cure that  was worse than  the disease. Only an 
active  public   life  could  remedy  the  shortcomings   of  representative 
bodies. By concentrating   absolute power  in  so few hands, the Bolshe- 
viks had "blocked up the fountain  of political   experience and.the source 
of this rising  development  [the  attaining  of higher  stages of socialism] 
by their  suppression of public  life."76 
     Beneath this  dispute was not just a difference  in tactics  but a funda- 
mental disagreement about the  nature of socialism.  Lenin proceeded as 
if the road  to socialism were  already mapped  out in detail  and the task 
of the  party  were to  use the iron  discipline   of  the party  apparatus  to 
make sure that  the revolutionary   movement kept  to that  road. Luxem- 
burg,  on the contrary,   believed that  the  future  of socialism  was  to be 
discovered  and worked  out in  a genuine collaboration   between  work- 
ers and their  revolutionary  state. There were no "ready-made  prescrip- 
tions"  for  the realization   of socialism,  nor  was there  "a key in any  so- 
cialist  party program  or textbook."77 The openness that characterized a 
socialist future  was not  a shortcoming  but rather  a sign of its superior- 
ity, as a dialectical  process, over the cut-and-dried  formulas  of  utopian 
socialism.  The  creation  of  socialism  was  "new  territory.   A thousand 
problems-only      experience is capable  of correcting  and  opening new 
ways. Only  unobstructed,   effervescing  life  falls  into  a  thousand  new 
forms  and improvisations,  brings  to light  creative  force,  itself corrects 
all  mistaken  attempts."78 Lenin's use of  decrees and  terror   and what 
Luxemburg   called  the  "dictatorial   force  of  the factory   overseer"  de- 
prived  the  revolution   of  this  popular  creative   force  and experience. 
Unless the  working  class as a whole  participated   in  the political   pro- 
cess, she added ominously,  "socialism   will  be decreed  from  behind  a 
few official   desks by a dozen  intellectual^."^^ 
     Looking   ahead, so soon after  the revolution,   to the  closed and  au- 
thoritarian   political   order  Lenin  was  constructing,   Luxemburg's  pre- 
dictions  were  chilling  but  accurate:  "But with  the  repression of  politi- 
cal  life  in  the  land  as a whole,  life   in  the soviets  must  also become 
crippled.   Without  general  elections,  without   unrestricted   freedom  of 
the press and assembly, without  a free struggle  of opinion,  life  dies out 
in  every public  institution.   . . . Public  life  gradually  falls asleep. . .  . In 
reality  only  a dozen  outstanding  heads [party  leaders]  do the  leading 
and  an elite of  the working  class is invited   to applaud  the speeches of 
the  leaders,  and  to approve   proposed  resolutions   unanimously-at 
bottom  then, a clique affair,  . . . a dictatorship  in the bourgeois ~ense."~O 

192
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 175 


Aleksandra   Kollontay   and  the Workers'   Opposition    to Lenin 

Aleksandra  Kollontay  was in  effect the  local voice  of a Luxemburgian 
critique  among the Bolsheviks  after  the revolution.  A revolutionary   ac- 
tivist,   the  head  of  the  women's   section  of  the   Central  Committee 
(Zhenotdel),  and,  by early  192 1, closely associated with  the  Workers' 
Opposition,   Kollontay   was a  thorn  in  Lenin's  side.  He regarded   the 
sharply  critical   pamphlet  she wrote  just  before  the  Tenth Party  Con- 
gress in  192 1 as a nearly  treasonous   act. The  Tenth Party  Congress 
opened just  as the  suppression  of  the workers'   and  sailors'  revolt  in 
Kronstadt  was being organized  and in the midst  of the Makno  uprising 
in the  Ukraine.  To attack  the party   leadership  at such  a perilous  mo- 
ment was a treacherous  appeal to  "the base instincts  of the masses." 
     There  was a direct   connection  between  Luxemburg   and her  Rus- 
sian colleague.  Kollontay  had  been deeply impressed  by reading  Lux- 
emburg's  Social  Reform  or Revolution   early  in  the  century  and  had 
actually  met Luxemburg  at a socialist  meeting  in Germany. While  Kol- 
lontay's  pamphlet  echoed  most of  Luxemburg's  criticisms   of  central- 
ized, authoritarian   socialist  practice,  its historical   context was distinc- 
tive. Kollontay  was making  her  case as part of the Workers' Opposition 
argument  for an all-Russian  congress of producers,  freely elected from 
the trade  unions,  which  would  direct  production   and industrial   plan- 
ning. Alexander  Shlyiapnikov,  a close ally of Kollontay,  and other  trade 
unionists  were alarmed  at the  increasingly  dominant  role  of technical 
specialists,  the bureaucracy,  and the party  center  and the exclusion  of 
workers'  organizations.  During  the civil  war, martial-law   techniques of 
management were  perhaps understandable.  But  now that the civil  war 
was largely won,  the direction  of socialist construction  seemed at stake. 
Kollontay   brought  to  her case for  trade-union   co-management  of  in- 
dustry  a wealth  of practical  experience  acquired  in the frustrating   job 
of negotiating  with  state organs  on behalf of  working  women who  had 
organized  creches  and canteens. In  the end,  the Workers'  Opposition 
was outlawed   and Kollontay   was silenced,  but not  before  leaving be- 
hind  a prophetic  legacy of criti~ism.~' 
     Kollontay's   pamphlet  attacked the party  state, which she compared 
to  an authoritarian    schoolteacher,   in much   the same  terms  used by 
Luxemburg.   She complained,  above all, that  the relationship   between 
the  central  committee   and the workers   had become  a stark  one-way 
relationship   of command.  The trade unions  were seen as a mere "con- 
necting   link"   or  transmission   belt  of  the party's   instructions   to  the 
workers;  unions  were expected to  "bring  up the masses" in exactly  the 
way a schoolteacher  whose curriculum   and lesson plans are mandated 

193
176 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


from above passes those lessons on to pupils.  She castigated the party 
for its  out-of-date  pedagogical  theory,  which  left  no room  for  the po- 
tential  originality   of  the students.  "When  one begins to  turn  over  the 
pages of the stenographic  minutes   and speeches made by our  promi- 
nent  leaders,  one is  astonished  by  the  unexpected  manifestation   of 
their  pedagogical  activities.   Every  author  of  the thesis  proposes  the 
most perfect system of bringing  up  the masses. But all these systems of 
'education'  lack provisions  for freedom  of experiment,  for training   and 
for  expression of  creative  abilities  by  those who  are  to be taught.   In 
this respect also all  our pedagogues are behind  the times."82 
     There is  some evidence that  Kollontay's  work  on  behalf of  women 
had a direct  bearing  on  her case for  the Workers'  Opposition.  Just  as 
Jacobs was  afforded  a different   view   of how  the  city  functioned   by 
virtue  of her  additional   roles  as housewife  and mother,   so Kollontay 
saw the party from  the vantage point  of  an advocate for women  whose 
work  was  rarely  taken  seriously.   She accused  the  party  of  denying 
women opportunities   in organization  of  "creative tasks in the sphere of 
production   and  development   of creative   abilities"   and  of  confining 
them  to the  "restricted   tasks  of home  economics,  household   duties, 
                  Heret~.''~~ experience of being patronized and condescended to as a 
representative  of the women's  section seems directly  tied  to her  accu- 
sation  that the  party  was  also treating   the workers   as infants  rather 
than as autonomous, creative adults.  In the same passage as her charge 
that  the   party   thought   women  fit   only   for   home  economics,   she 
mocked  Trotsky's praise  for  the  workers  at  a miner's   congress, who 
had voluntarily   replaced shop  windows,  as showing that  he wanted  to 
limit  them  to mere janitorial   tasks. 
     Like  Luxemburg,  Kollontay   believed that  the building   of socialism 
could  not be accomplished  by  the Central  Committee  alone,  however 
farseeing it  might be. The  unions were  not mere  instruments  or trans- 
mission belts in the building  of socialism;  they were to a great extent the 
subjects and the  creators of  a socialist  mode of  production.  Kollontay 
put  the fundamental   difference   succinctly:   "The Workers' Opposition 
sees in the unions  the managers  and creators of  the communist   econ- 
omy, whereas Bukharin,  together with  Lenin  and Trotsky, leave to them 
only the role of schools of communism   and no more."84 
     Kollontay  shared  Luxemburg's conviction   that the  practical  experi- 
ence of industrial workers  on the factory floor  was indispensable knowl- 
edge that the experts and technicians  needed. She did not want  to min- 
imize the role  of specialists and officials;  they were vital,  but they could 
do their  job  effectively  only in  a genuine  collaboration   with  the trade 
unions  and workers.   Her vision   of the  form  this  collaboration   might 

194
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 177 


take closely  resembles  that  of  an agricultural    extension  service  and 
farmers  to whose  needs the  service is  closely tied.  That  is, technical 
centers  concerned  with   industrial   production   would   be  established 
throughout  Russia, but  the tasks they  addressed and the services they 
provided  would  be directly   responsive to the  demands of  the produc- 
ems5 The experts would  serve  the producers  rather  than  dictating   to 
them. To  this  end  Kollontay  proposed  that   a host  of  specialists  and 
officials,  who had no  practical  factory  experience  and who had joined 
the party  after  1919, be dismissed-at     least until  they had  done some 
manual labor. 
     She clearly   saw, as did  Luxemburg,   the social  and  psychological 
consequences of frustrating  the independent  initiatives  of  workers. Ar- 
guing  from  concrete  examples-workers      procuring   firewood,   estab- 
lishing  a dining  hall,  and opening  a nursery-she     explained how  they 
were thwarted   at  every turn  by  bureaucratic   delay and  pettifoggery: 
''Every independent  thought  or initiative   is treated as a 'heresy,' as a vi- 
olation  of  party  discipline,   as an attempt  to  infringe   on the  preroga- 
tives of the center,  which  must 'foresee' everything   and 'decree' every- 
thing  and anything."   The harm  done came  not just  from  the  fact that 
the specialists and bureaucrats were  more likely  to make bad decisions. 
The attitude  had two  other consequences. First,  it  reflected a  "distrust 
towards  the creative  abilities  of the  workers,"  which  was unworthy   of 
the  "professed  ideals  of  our  party."  Second,  and most  important,    it 
smothered the  morale and  creative spirit  of the  working  class. In  their 
frustration   at the specialists and officials,  "the workers  became cynical 
and said, 'let  [the] officials  themselves take  care of us.'"  The end result 
was an arbitrary,   myopic  layer  of officials   presiding  over  a dispirited 
workforce  putting   in a "bad-faith"   day on the factory  floor.86 
     Kollontay's  point   of departure,  like  Luxemburg's,  is an assumption 
about what  kinds  of tasks are the making  of revolutions   and the creat- 
ing of  new forms  of production.   For both  of them,  such tasks are  voy- 
ages in uncharted  waters. There may be some rules of thumb,  but there 
can be no blueprints   or battle  plans drawn  up  in advance;  the numer- 
ous unknowns  in the equation  make a one-step solution  inconceivable. 
In  more  technical  language,  such goals can  be approached  only  by a 
stochastic process of successive approximations,  trial  and  error, exper- 
iment,  and  learning   through   experience.  The kind  of  knowledge   re- 
quired  in  such endeavors  is not  deductive  knowledge  from  first  prin- 
ciples  but  rather  what  Greeks  of the  classical  period  called  metis,  a 
concept  to which  we shall  return.  Usually  translated,  inadequately,  as 
"cunning,"  metis is better  understood as the kind  of knowledge that  can 
be acquired  only  by long practice   at similar  but  rarely  identical  tasks, 

195
178 TRANSFORMING VISIONS 


which  requires  constant  adaptation   to changing  circumstances.   It  is 
to this kind  of knowledge  that  Luxemburg  appealed when  she charac- 
terized  the building   of  socialism  as  "new territory"    demanding   "im- 
provisation"   and "creativity."   It  is to this  kind  of knowledge   that  Kol- 
lontay  appealed  when  she  insisted  that   the party   leaders  were  not 
infallible,   that  they needed the  "everyday  experience"  and  "practical 
work  of  the basic  class  collectives"   of those  "who  actually   produce 
and organize  production    at the same  time.'I8' In  an analogy  that  any 
Marxist  would  recognize,  Kollontay  asked whether  it was conceivable 
that  the cleverest  feudal  estate  managers  could  have invented   early 
capitalism  by themselves.  Of course not,  she answered,  because their 
knowledge  and  skills were  directly   tied  to feudal  production,   just  as 
the technical  specialists  of her  day had learned  their  lessons within   a 
capitalist   framework.   There  was simply   no precedent  for  the  future 
now being  forged. 
     Echoing,   for  rhetorical   effect,  a  sentiment  that  both  Luxemburg 
and Lenin  had uttered,  Kollontay   claimed  that  "it  is impossible  to de- 
cree communism.  It  can be created only  in the process of practical   re- 
search, through  mistakes,  perhaps, but  only by the  creative  powers of 
the working   class itself." While  specialists  and officials  had  a collabo- 
rative  role of  vital  importance,   "only  those who  are directly  bound  to 
industry  can introduce  into  it  animating   innovation^."^^ 

For Lenin, the vanguard  party is a machine for  making a revolution  and 
then  for  building   socialism-tasks      whose  main  lines  have,  it  is  as- 
sumed, already been worked  out.  For Le Corbusier,  the house is a ma- 
chine for  living,   and the city  planner  is  a specialist whose  knowledge 
shows him how a city  must be built. For  Le Corbusier, the people are ir- 
relevant to  the process of city planning,  although  the result  is designed 
with  their well-being  and  productivity   in mind.  Lenin  cannot make the 
revolution  without  the proletariat,   but they are seen largely as troops to 
be deployed.  The  goals of  revolution   and  scientific  socialism  are,  of 
course, also for the benefit  of the working  class. Each of these schemes 
implies a single, unitary  answer  discoverable by specialists and hence a 
command  center, which  can, or  ought to, impose  the correct  solution. 
     Kollontay   and  Luxemburg,   in  contrast,  take  the tasks  at hand  to 
be unknowable   in advance.  Given  the uncertainty   of the  endeavor, a 
plurality   of experiments  and  initiatives  will   best reveal which  lines  of 
attack  are fruitful    and which   are barren.   The revolution   and  social- 
ism will  fare best, as will  Jacobs's city, when they are joint  productions 
between technicians  and gifted, experienced amateurs.  Above all, there 
is no  strict   distinction   between   means and  ends.  Luxemburg's   and 

196
                                                                           The Revolutionary Party 179 


Kollontay's  vanguard  party  is not producing   a revolution  or  socialism 
in the  straightforward    sense that a factory  produces,  say, axles. Thus 
the vanguard party  cannot be adequately judged,  as a factory might, by 
its output-by      how  many  axles  of a  certain  quality   it  makes with   a 
given labor   force,  capitalization,   and  so on-no     matter   how  it  goes 
about producing   that  result.  Also,  the vanguard  party   of Luxemburg 
and Kollontay  is at the  same time producing  a certain  kind  of working 
class-a     creative,  conscious,   competent,   and  empowered  working 
class-that     is the precondition   of  its achieving  any  of its  other goals. 
Put positively,  the way the trip  is made  matters  at least as much as the 
destination.   Put negatively,  a vanguard  party   can achieve  its  revolu- 
tionary  results in  ways that defeat  its central  purpose. 

198
Part  3 



          The Social Engineering of Rural 

          Settlement and Production 

200
Legibility is a condition  of manipulation. Any substantial state inter- 
vention in society-to  vaccinate a population, produce goods, mobilize 
labor, tax people and their property, conduct literacy campaigns, con- 
script soldiers, enforce sanitation standards, catch criminals, start uni- 
versal schooling-requires  the invention of units that are visible. The 
units in question might be citizens, villages, trees, fields, houses, or peo- 
ple grouped according to age, depending on the type of intervention. 
Whatever the units being manipulated, they must be organized in a 
manner that permits them to be identified, observed, recorded, counted, 
aggregated, and monitored. The degree of knowledge required would 
have to be roughly commensurate with the depth of the intervention. 
In other words, one might say that the greater the manipulation envis- 
aged, the greater the legibility required to effect it. 
     It was precisely this phenomenon, which had reached full tide by 
the middle of the nineteenth century, that Proudhon had in mind when 
he declared, "To be ruled is to be kept an eye on, inspected, spied on, 
regulated, indoctrinated,  sermonized, listed  and checked off,  esti- 
mated, appraised, censured, ordered about. . . . To be ruled is at every 
operation, transaction, movement, to be noted, registered, counted, 
priced, admonished, prevented, reformed, redressed, corrected."l 
     From another perspective, what Proudhon was deploring was in 
fact the great achievement of modern statecraft. How hard-won and 
tenuous this achievement was is worth emphasizing. Most states, to 
speak broadly, are "younger" than the societies that they purport to ad- 
minister. States therefore confront patterns of settlement, social rela- 

201
184 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


tions, and production,  not  to mention  a natural  environment,  that have 
evolved largely independent   of state plans.2 The result is typically  a di- 
versity, complexity,   and unrepeatability    of social  forms  that  are rela- 
tively opaque to  the state, often  purposely  so. Consider, for a moment, 
the patterns  in such  urban  settlements  as Bruges or  the medina  of an 
old Middle   Eastern city  touched  on earlier   (see chapter 2).  Each city, 
each quarter,  each neighborhood   is unique;  it  is the  historical  vector 
sum of millions   of designs  and activities.  While   its form  and function 
surely have  a logic,  that  logic  is not  derived  from  any  single,  overall 
plan.  Its complexity   defies easy mapping.  Any map,  moreover,  would 
be spatially  and temporally  limited.   The map of a single neighborhood 
would  provide   little   guidance  to  the   unique  intricacies   of  the  next 
neighborhood,  and  a description  that  was satisfactory  today would  be 
inadequate in  a few years. 
     If  the  state's goals  are  minimal,    it  may not   need to  know  much 
about the  society. Just  as a woodsman  who  takes only  an  occasional 
load of firewood   from  a large forest  need have no detailed  knowledge 
of that forest,  so a state whose demands are confined to grabbing  a few 
carts of grain  and the odd conscript  may not  require  a very accurate or 
detailed  map  of the  society. If,  however,  the  state is  ambitious-if      it 
wants to  extract  as much grain  and manpower   as it can, short  of pro- 
voking  a famine  or a rebellion,   if  it wants  to  create a literate,   skilled, 
and  healthy  population,   if  it  wants  everyone  to speak the  same lan- 
guage or worship  the  same god-then     it will   have to become both  far 
more knowledgeable  and  far more  intrusive. 
     How   does the state  get a handle   on the  society? Here  and  in  the 
next  two  chapters,  I  am especially   concerned  with  the  logic  behind 
large-scale attempts  to redesign  rural  life  and production   from  above. 
Seen from  the center,  the royal  court  or the  seat of state, this  process 
has often been described  as a "civilizing                    I proce~s."~ prefer to see it as 
an  attempt  at  domestication,   a  kind  of  social  gardening   devised  to 
make the  countryside,   its products,   and  its inhabitants   more  readily 
identifiable   and accessible to  the center.  Certain  elements of these ef- 
forts  at  domestication   seem, if  not  universal,  at  least very  common, 
and they may be termed  "sedentarization,"   "concentration,"   and "radi- 
cal simplification''   of  both settlement  and cultivation. 
     We shall examine  in some detail two  notorious  schemes of agrarian 
simplification-collectivization          in Soviet  Russia and ujamaa  villages 
in  Tanzania-searching     both  for the  larger  political   logic  of their  de- 
sign and  for the  reasons behind  their  manifold   failures  as schemes of 
production.   First, however, it  may help to provide  a schematic  illustra- 
tion  of this process from  the history  of Southeast  Asia, which  reveals a 

202
                                                               Rural Settlement and Production 185 


great continuity   of  purpose  that joins  the  projects  of the precolonial, 
colonial,  and  independence  regimes together  with  the  modern  state's 
progressive  capacity  to  realize  these  projects  of  planned  settlement 
and production. 

The demography  of precolonial   Southeast  Asia was such  that control 
of land per  se, unless it was a strategically  vital  estuary, strait,  or pass, 
was seldom   decisive  in  state building.    Control   of the  population- 
roughly five persons per  square kilometer  in  1700-mattered    far more. 
The key to successful statecraft  was  typically  the ability   to attract  and 
hold a substantial,  productive  population  within   a reasonable radius of 
the court.  Given the relative  sparseness of the population   and the ease 
of physical  flight,  the control  of  arable land  was pointless unless there 
was a population  to work   it. The precolonial   kingdom  thus trod  a nar- 
row path  between a level of taxes and corvke exactions  that would  sus- 
tain  a monarch's  ambitions  and  a level that  would  precipitate   whole- 
sale  flight.   Precolonial   wars   were  more   often   about  rounding   up 
captives and  settling  them near  the central  court  than  asserting a ter- 
ritorial   claim. A growing,  productive   population  settled in  the ambit  of 
a monarch's   capital   was  a  more  reliable   indicator    of  a  kingdom's 
power than  its physical  extent. 
     The precolonial   state was thus vitally  interested  in  the sedentariza- 
tion of  its population-in      the creation  of permanent,  fixed settlements. 
The greater the  concentration  of people,  providing  that  they produced 
an  economic   surplus,  the  greater   the  ease of  appropriating    grain, 
labor,  and military   service.  At the  crudest level,  this  determinist   geo- 
graphical  logic  is nothing   more than  an application   of standard  theo- 
ries  of location.   As Johann  Heinrich  von  Thunen,  Walter  Christaller, 
and G.  William  Skinner   have amply  demonstrated,   the economics  of 
movement,  other  things  being  equal, tend  to  produce  recurring   geo- 
graphical  patterns  of market  location,  crop specialization,   and admin- 
istrative   ~tructure.~ The   political    appropriation    of  labor   and  grain 
tends to obey much the same locational  logic,  favoring  population  con- 
centration   rather  than  dispersion  and reflecting   a logic  of appropria- 
tion  based on transportation   costs.5 In this context, much  of the classi- 
cal  literature    on  statecraft   is   preoccupied   with   the  techniques   of 
attracting  and  holding  a population  in an environment   where they  can 
flee to  the nearby  frontier   or settle  under  the wing  of another   nearby 
prince.  The expression "to vote with  one's feet" had a literal  meaning in 
much  of Southeast Asia.6 
     Traditional   Thai  statecraft  hit on  a novel technique  for  minimizing 
flight  and attaching  commoners  to the state or to their  noble  lords. The 

203
186 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


Thai devised a system of tattoos  for literally   marking  commoners  with 
symbols making   it clear  who  "belonged"  to  whom.  Such  tattooing  is 
evidence that exceptional  measures were  required  to identify  and fix  a 
subject population  inclined   to vote with  its feet. So common  was phys- 
ical flight  that  a large  number  of bounty  hunters  made a living   cours- 
ing the forests in  search of runaways  to return  to their  lawful   owner^.^ 
Similar   problems  beset  the  estates of  Roman  Catholic   friars  in  the 
early years  of Spain's dominion   in  the Philippines.   The Tagalogs who 
were resettled  and  organized  for  supervised production    on the Latin 
American  model  frequently   fled  the  harsh  labor   regime.  They were 
known  as remontados, that  is, peasants who had  gone "back  up to the 
hills," where  they enjoyed  more autonomy. 
     More generally, for  precolonial  and colonial  Southeast Asia, it might 
be helpful  to think  in terms  of state spaces and nonstate spaces. In  the 
first, to put  it crudely, the  subject population  was settled rather  densely 
in quasi-permanent   communities,   producing   a surplus  of grain  (usu- 
ally of wet  rice)  and labor  which  was relatively  easily appropriated   by 
the state. In  the second, the  population  was  sparsely settled, typically 
practiced  slash-and-burn   or  shifting   cultivation,   maintained   a  more 
mixed  economy  (including,   for   example,  polyculture   or  reliance  on 
forest products),   and was highly  mobile,  thereby  severely limiting   the 
possibilities  for reliable  state appropriation.    State spaces and nonstate 
spaces were not  merely  preexisting   ecological  and  geographical  set- 
tings that  encouraged  or discouraged  the formation   of states. A major 
objective of would-be  rulers  was to create and then expand state spaces 
by building  irrigation   works,  capturing  subjects in wars,  forcing  settle- 
ment, codifying  religions, and so on. The classical state envisaged a con- 
centrated  population,  within   easy range, producing  a steady supply  of 
easily transportable,  storable grain  and tribute  and providing   a surplus 
of manpower  for  security, war,  and public  works. 
     Edmund   Leach's perceptive   effort  to  understand   the  frontiers  of 
Burma  implicitly   followed   this logic  in  its reconstruction   of the  tradi- 
tional  Burmese  polity.   He suggested  that  we look  at  the precolonial 
Burmese state not  as a physically  contiguous  territory,  as we would  in 
the context   of modern   states, but  as  a complex  patchwork   that   fol- 
lowed  an entirely   different  logic.  We should  picture   the kingdom,  he 
insisted,  in terms  of horizontal   slices through  the topography.  Follow- 
ing this  logic, Burma  was, in  practice,  a collection  of all the  sedentary, 
wet-rice  producers  settled in valleys  within  the ambit  of the court  cen- 
ter. These would be, in the terms  suggested above, the state spaces. The 
next horizontal   stratum   of the landscape  from,  say, five hundred   feet 
to fifteen  hundred   feet would,  given  its  different  ecology,  contain  in- 

204
                                                               Rural Settlement and Production 187 


habitants  who  practiced  shifting   cultivation,   were  more  widely  scat- 
tered,  and were  therefore   less promising   subjects  of  appropriation. 
They were  not  an integral   part  of the  kingdom,  although   they might 
regularly  send tribute to the central  court.  Still  higher elevations would 
constitute yet other ecological, political,   and cultural  zones. What Leach 
proposed,  in  effect, is  that  we consider  all  relatively   dense, wet-rice 
settlements within   range of  the capital  as "the kingdom"   and the  rest, 
even if relatively  close to the  capital,  as "nonstate  space^."^ 
     The role  of  statecraft  in  this  context  becomes that  of  maximizing 
the productive,   settled  population    in  such state  spaces while   at the 
same time drawing   tribute  from,  or at  least neutralizing,   the nonstate 
  paces.^ These stateless zones have always played a potentially subver- 
sive role, both  symbolically  and  practically.  From  the vantage point  of 
the court,   such  spaces and their   inhabitants   were  the  exemplars  of 
rudeness, disorder, and  barbarity  against which  the  civility,  order, and 
sophistication   of the  center  could  be  gauged.I0 Such  spaces, it  goes 
without  saying, have served as refuges for fleeing peasants, rebels, ban- 
dits, and the pretenders  who  have often threatened  kingdoms. 
     Of  course,  the ecology  of  different   elevations  is  only  one among 
many factors  that  might   characterize  nonstate  spaces. They  also ap- 
pear to share one or more of the  following  distinctive  features: they  are 
relatively   impenetrable   (wild,   trackless,  labyrinthine,    inhospitable); 
their  population  is  dispersed or  migratory;   and they are unpromising 
sites for surplus appropriation."    Thus marshes and swamps (one thinks 
of the  now  beleaguered   Marsh  Arabs  on  the  Iraqi-Iranian    border), 
ever-shifting  deltas  and estuaries,  mountains,  deserts (favored  by  no- 
madic  Berbers and  Bedouins),  and the sea (home  to the so-called  sea 
gypsies of southern  Burma),  and, more  generally, the  frontier  have all 
served as  "nonstate  spaces" in  the  sense that  I  have been  using  the 
term. l2 
     Contemporary   development   schemes, whether   in  Southeast Asia 
or elsewhere,  require   the creation   of state spaces where  the  govern- 
ment can  reconfigure  the society  and economy  of those who  are to be 
"developed."  The transformation     of peripheral    nonstate  spaces into 
state spaces by the  modern,   developmentalist   nation-state  is  ubiqui- 
tous  and,  for  the  inhabitants   of  such  spaces, frequently   traumatic. 
Anna Lowenhaupt  Tsing's sensitive account of the attempts of the  Indo- 
nesian state to capture,  as it were, the nomadic  Meratus  hill  peoples of 
Kalimantan  describes a striking   case in point. The  Meratus live,  as she 
notes, in  an area that,   "so far, has eluded  the clarity   and visibility   re- 
quired for  model development schemes." As migratory hunter-gatherers 
who  at the  same time  practice   shifting   cultivation,   who  live  in  con- 

205
188 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


stantly  changing  kinship   units,  who  are widely   dispersed  over a  de- 
manding  terrain,  and  who are,  in Indonesian  eyes, pagans, the Mera- 
tus are a tough  case for development.   Indonesian  officials  have tried, 
in their  desultory   fashion, to  concentrate  the  Meratus  in planned  vil- 
lages near the main roads.  The implicit   goal was to create a fixed, con- 
centrated population   that officials  in  charge of the management  of iso- 
lated populations   could  see and  instruct   when  touring  the  district.I3 
Meratus  immobility   was the precondition   of  state supervision  and de- 
velopment,  whereas  much  of the  identity   of the  Meratus  as a people 
depended on "unhampered   mobility."14 
     The inaccessibility   of  the  Meratus  was, in  state-development  par- 
lance and in  the eyes of government  officials,  an index  of their  lamen- 
table backwardness.  They were  described by  their  would-be  civilizers 
as "not yet  arranged"  or  "not yet  ordered"  (belum  di-ator),  as "not yet 
brought  to religion"   (belum berugama), and  their  cultivation  practices 
were described   as "disorderly   agriculture"    (pertanian  yang tidak  ter- 
atur).  For their   part,  the  Meratus  grasped  the essentials  of what  the 
government  had in mind  for  them. They had been asked to settle along 
the main  tracks  through  the forest,  one local  leader  observed, "so the 
government  can see the people." The clustered houses they were asked 
to settle in  were meant,  they believed, to  "look good  if the government 
came to visit."15 Cast in a discourse of development,  progress,  and civ- 
ilization,  the  plans of the  Indonesian  state for the Meratus  peoples are 
at the same time  a synoptic project  of  legibility  and  concentration. 
     It  is in the  context of actual  rebellion  where  the effort to  create and 
sharply  distinguish  state  spaces from nonstate  spaces is carried  to  its 
logical conclusion.  The nature of military  threat  requires clearly  defined 
and easily  monitored  and  patrolled  state spaces, such as forts,  forced 
settlements,  or  internment    camps. Modern   examples  of this   can be 
found  in  the so-called  new  villages  in Malaya  during   the Emergency 
following  World  War 11, which were designed particularly   to  sequester 
a Chinese smallholder   and  rubber-tapping   population   and prevent  it 
from  providing   manpower,  food,  cash, and  supplies  to a largely  Chi- 
nese guerrilla  force  in the hinterland   beyond. In  an arrangement  later 
copied  in  the "strategic   hamlets"  in  Vietnam,  the reluctant   residents 
were lodged  in identical,   numbered  houses arrayed in  straight  lines.16 
The population's   movement  in  and  out  was strictly   monitored.   They 
were one short  step away  from  the concentration   camps built  in  war- 
time  to  create  and  maintain    a legible,   bounded,  concentrated  state 
space and seal it  off as completely  as possible from  the outside.  Here, 
direct  control   and discipline   are more important   than  appropriation. 
In  recent times there  have been unprecedented  efforts to reclaim   non- 

206
                                                               Rural Settlement and Production 189 


state space for  the state.  In  any case, that  is one way  to characterize 
the massive  use of Agent  Orange to  defoliate  large  sections  of forest 
during  the  Vietnam  War, thus  render  the  forest  legible  and  safe (for 
government  forces, that  is). 

The concept of state spaces, suitably modified  for  the context  of a mar- 
ket economy, can also help  us to resolve  an apparent  paradox  in colo- 
nial agrarian  policy  in  Southeast Asia. How  do we explain  the decided 
colonial  preference   for  plantation   agriculture   over  smallholder   pro- 
duction?  The grounds  for  the choice  can certainly   not have been  effi- 
ciency. For almost any  crop one can name, with  the  possible exception 
of sugarcane,17 smallholders  have  been able  historically   to  out-com- 
pete larger   units   of production.    Time  and  time   again,  the  colonial 
states found, small  producers,  owing  to their  low  fixed costs and flexi- 
ble use of family  labor,  could  consistently  undersell  state-managed  or 
private-sector  plantations. 
     The paradox  is largely  resolved,  I  believe,  if we consider   the "effi- 
ciencies"  of the  plantation  as a unit   of taxation  (both  taxes on  profits 
and various  export  levies), of labor  discipline  and  surveillance,  and of 
political   control.   Take,  for  example,   rubber  production    in  colonial 
Malaya. At the  beginning  of the rubber  boom  in  the first  decade of the 
twentieth  century, British   officials and  investors no doubt  believed that 
rubber  produced  by  estates, which   had better   planting   stock, better 
scientific  management,   and more  available  labor,  would  prove  more 
efficient  and profitable  than  rubber produced  by smallh~lders.~~ When 
they discovered  they  were  wrong,  however,  officials  persisted  in  sys- 
tematically   favoring   rubber  estates at  some considerable   cost to  the 
overall  economy   of the  colony.  The  infamous   Stevenson  scheme in 
Malaya during  the worldwide   depression  was a particularly   blatant at- 
tempt  to  preserve the  failing   estate sector  of  the  rubber  industry   by 
limiting   smallholder   production.   Without  it,  most  estates would  have 
perished. 
     The  fact that,   in protecting   the  estate sector,  the  colonizers  were 
also protecting   the interests  of  their  countrymen   and those of  metro- 
politan   investors  was only  one  factor  in  explaining   their  policy.  If  it 
were  the main  reason,  one would  expect  the policy  to  lapse with   the 
country's  independence.  As we shall shortly  see, it did not.  The planta- 
tions,  although  less efficient  than smallholders   as producers,  were far 
more  convenient  as units of taxation.   It was  easier to monitor   and tax 
large,  publicly-owned    businesses than  to  do  so for  a  vast swarm  of 
small  growers  who  were  here  today  and gone  tomorrow   and  whose 
landholdings,   production,   and  profits  were  illegible   to the  state. But 

207
190 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


because plantations specialized  in a single crop,  it was a simple matter 
to assess their  production   and  profits.  A  second advantage  of  estate 
rubber  production   was that  it typically   provided  centralized   forms of 
residence and  labor  that were  far  more  amenable to  central  political 
and administrative    control.  Estates were,  in  a word,  far  more legible 
communities   than  were the  Malay  kampung,  which  had  its own  his- 
tory, leadership,  and mixed  economy. 
     A comparable  logic  can be usefully  applied  to the establishment   of 
federal land  schemes in independent  Malaysia. Why did  the Malaysian 
state elect to establish  large, costly, bureaucratically    monitored  settle- 
ments in the  1960s and 1970s when the  frontier  was already  being ac- 
tively  pioneered  by  large-scale  voluntary   migration?    Pioneer  settle- 
ment  cost  the  state  virtually    nothing   and  had  historically     created 
viable  household  enterprises  that  grew  and marketed  cash  crops. As 
an economic  proposition,   the  huge rubber  and  palm  oil concerns  es- 
tablished  by the government  made little   sense. They were enormously 
costly  to set up,  the  capital  expenditure  per  settler  being  far  beyond 
what a rational   businessman would  have invested. 
     Politically   and  administratively,   however,  the  advantages of  these 
large, centrally   planned,  and centrally  run  government  schemes were 
manifold.   At  a time  when  the  attempted   revolution   of  the  Malayan 
Communist   Party was  still  fresh  in the  minds  of the  country's  Malay 
rulers,  planned   settlements  had some  of the  advantages  of strategic 
hamlets.  They were  laid  out  according   to  a simple  grid  pattern   and 
were  immediately   legible  to an  outside  official.   The house  lots were 
numbered  consecutively, and the inhabitants  were registered  and mon- 
itored  far more  closely than  in  open frontier  areas.  Malaysian  settlers 
could be, and  were, carefully  selected for  age, skills, and political   reli- 
ability;  villagers in  the state of Kedah, where I worked  in the late  1970s, 
understood  that  if they wanted  to be selected for  a settlement scheme, 
they  needed a recommendation    from  a local  politician    of the  ruling 
Pafly. 
     The  administrative   and  economic  situation   of  the  Malaysian  set- 
tlers was comparable  to that  of the "company  towns"  of early  industri- 
alization,   where  everyone worked   at comparable  jobs,  were  paid  by 
the  same boss, lived  in  company  housing,  and  shopped  at the  same 
company  store.  Until  the  plantation   crops  were  mature,  the  settlers 
were paid  a wage. Their production   was marketed through   state chan- 
nels, and they  could be dismissed  for any  one of a large number  of  in- 
fractions   against  the rules  established  by  the scheme's officials.   The 
economic   dependency  and  direct  political    control   meant  that  such 
schemes could regularly  be made to produce  large electoral  majorities 

208
                                                               Rural Settlement and Production 19 1 


for the  ruling   party. Collective  protest   was rare  and could  usually  be 
snuffed  out by  the  sanctions  available  to  the administrators.    It  goes 
without  saying  that the  settlements  of the Federal  Land  Development 
Authority  (FELDA) allowed the state to control  the  mix of  export crops, 
to monitor   production   and  processing,  and to  set producer  prices  in 
order to  generate revenue. 
     The publicly   stated  rationale  for  planned  settlement  schemes was 
almost  always couched  in  the  discourse  of orderly   development  and 
social services (such  as the provision  of health  clinics,  sanitation,  ade- 
quate housing,  education,  clean water, and  infrastructure).   The public 
rhetoric  was not  intentionally   insincere;  it was, however,  misleadingly 
silent  about  the manifold   ways in  which  orderly   development  of this 
kind  served  important   goals of  appropriation,    security,  and political 
hegemony that  could  not have been met through   autonomous frontier 
settlement.  FELDA schemes were "soft" civilian versions  of the new  vil- 
lages created  as part  of  counterinsurgency   policy.  The dividend   they 
paid  was less an economic  return   than a dividend   in expanding  state 
spaces. 
     State  plans of  sedentarization   and planned  settlement  have rarely 
gone as anticipated-in      Malaysia  or elsewhere. Like  the scientific  for- 
est or the grid  city, the targets  of development  have habitually  escaped 
the fine-tuned  control  aspired  to by their  inventors.  But we must  never 
overlook  the fact that  the effect of these schemes, however  inflected by 
local  practice,   lies as much  in  what  they  replace  as in  the degree  to 
which  they live  up to their  own  rhetoric. 
     The  concentration   of  population   in  planned  settlements  may  not 
create  what  state planners  had in  mind,  but  it has almost  always  dis- 
rupted  or destroyed prior   communities  whose cohesion derived  mostly 
from  nonstate  sources.  The communities   thus superseded-however 
objectionable  they  may have been on normative  grounds-were     likely 
to  have had their  own  unique histories,  social  ties, mythology,  and ca- 
pacity  for joint   action.  Virtually  by definition,   the state-designated  set- 
tlement  must  start  from  the beginning   to build  its  own sources  of co- 
hesion  and joint  action.  A new community   is thus, also by definition,   a 
community   demobilized,   and  hence a community   more  amenable  to 
 control  from  above and outside.19 

210
6      Soviet        Collectivization, 
        Capitalist            Dreams 













The master builders of Soviet society were rather more like Niemeyer 
designing Brasilia than Baron Haussmann retrofitting Paris. A combi- 
nation of defeat in war, economic collapse, and a revolution had pro- 
vided the closest thing to a bulldozed site that a state builder ever gets. 
The result was a kind of ultrahigh modernism that in its audacity re- 
called the utopian aspects of its precursor, the French Revolution. 
    This is not the place, nor am I the most knowledgeable guide, for an 
extensive discussion of Soviet high modernism.' What I aim to do, in- 
stead, is to emphasize the cultural and aesthetic elements in Soviet 
high modernism. This will in turn pave the way for an examination of 
an illuminating point of direct contact between Soviet and American 
high modernism: the belief in huge, mechanized, industrial farms. 
    In certain vital respects, Soviet high modernism is not a sharp break 
from Russian absolutism. Ernest Gellner has argued that of the two 
facets of the Enlightenment-the one asserting the sovereignty of the 
individual and his interests, the other commending the rational au- 
thority of experts-it was the second that spoke to rulers who wanted 
their "backward" states to catch up. The Enlightenment arrived in Cen- 
tral Europe, he concludes, as a "centralizing rather than a liberating 
force."* 
    Strong historical echoes of Leninist high modernism can thus be 
found in what Richard Stites calls the "administrative utopianism" of 
the Russian czars and their advisers in the eighteenth and nineteenth 
centuries. This administrative utopianism found expression in a suc- 
cession of schemes to organize the population (serfs, soldiers, workers, 

211
194 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


functionaries)  into  institutions   "based upon  hierarchy,  discipline,  reg- 
imentation,  strict  order, rational  planning,  a geometrical  environment, 
and a form  of ~elfarism."~Peter    the Great's  Saint Petersburg  was the 
urban  realization   of this  vision.  The city  was  laid  out according   to a 
strict rectilinear   and radial  plan on completely  new terrain.  Its  straight 
boulevards were, by design, twice  as wide as the tallest building,  which 
was, naturally,  at the geometric  center  of the city.  The buildings  them- 
selves reflected function  and  hierarchy,  as the facade, height,  and ma- 
terial  of  each corresponded  to  the social  class of  its inhabitants.   The 
city's physical   layout  was in  fact  a legible  map  of its  intended  social 
structure. 
     Saint  Petersburg  had many  counterparts,   urban  and rural.   Under 
Catherine  the Great, Prince  Grigory  Potemkin  established  a whole se- 
ries of model cities (such as Ekaterinoslav)  and model rural settlements. 
The next two czars, Paul and Alexander  I, inherited  Catherine's passion 
for  Prussian order  and effi~iency.~Their  adviser, Alexei  Arakcheev, es- 
tablished  a  model  estate on  which  peasants  wore  uniforms   and fol- 
lowed  elaborate instructions   on upkeep and maintenance,  to the  point 
of carrying   "punishment  books"  inscribed  with   records of  their  viola- 
tions. This  estate was made the basis of a far bolder plan  for a network 
of widely  scattered,  self-sufficient  military   colonies,  which  by the  late 
1820s included  750,000 people. This attempt  to create a new Russia, in 
contrast  to the disorder,  mobility,  and flux  of a frontier  society, quickly 
succumbed  to popular   resistance,  corruption,   and  inefficiency.  Long 
before the Bolsheviks  took power,  in any case, the historical  landscape 
was littered  with  the wreckage  of many  miscarried  experiments  in au- 
thoritarian   social  planning. 
     Lenin  and  his confederates  could  implement  their  high-modernist 
plans starting  from  nearly zero. The war,  the revolution,  and the subse- 
quent  famine  had  gone a long  way  toward   dissolving  the prerevolu- 
tionary  society, particularly  in the cities.  A general collapse of industrial 
production  had  provoked a vast exodus from the  cities and a virtual  re- 
gression  to a barter  economy. The ensuing  four-year  civil  war  further 
dissolved existing  social ties as well  as schooling the hard-pressed Bol- 
sheviks  in the  methods  of  "war  Communismv-requisitions,       martial 
law, coercion. 
     Working   on a leveled social  terrain  and  harboring  high-modernist 
ambitions  in  keeping  with  the distinction   of  being the pioneers  of the 
first  socialist revolution,   the Bolsheviks thought  big. Nearly  everything 
they planned  was  on a monumental   scale, from  cities  and  individual 
buildings   (the  Palace of Soviets)  to  construction   projects  (the  White 
Sea Canal) and, later, the  great industrial   projects of the  first Five-Year 

212
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 195 


Plan  (Magnitogorsk),    not   to  mention   collectivization.     Sheila   Fitz- 
patrick  has appropriately    called  this passion  for  sheer size  "giganto- 
mania.'I5 The economy itself was conceived as a well-ordered  machine, 
where  everyone would   simply  produce  goods of  the description    and 
quantity  specified by the central  state's statistical  bureau, as Lenin  had 
foreseen. 
     A transformation    of the physical  world  was  not, however,  the only 
item  on the  Bolshevik  agenda.  It  was a cultural   revolution   that  they 
sought, the  creation  of  a new person.  Members  of the  secular intelli- 
gentsia were  the most  devoted  partisans  of this  aspect of  the revolu- 
tion.  Campaigns to promote  atheism  and to suppress  Christian  rituals 
were pressed  in  the villages.   New  "revolutionary"    funeral   and mar- 
riage ceremonies  were  invented  amidst  much  fanfare,  and a ritual   of 
"Octobering   was encouraged  as an alternative to bapti~m.~ Cremation 
-rational,     clean,  economical-was      promoted.  Along  with  this  secu- 
larization   came enormous  and widely  popular  campaigns  to promote 
education  and  literacy.  Architects   and social  planners   invented  new 
communal  living   arrangements  designed  to supersede  the bourgeois 
family   pattern.   Communal    food,  laundry,   and   child-care   services 
promised  to free  women  from  the traditional   division   of labor.  Hous- 
ing arrangements  were  explicitly  intended  to be "social  condensers." 
     The "new manv-the    Bolshevik specialist, engineer, or functionary- 
came to represent   a new code of  social ethics,  which  was  sometimes 
simply  called  kultura.  In  keeping  with  the cult  of technology   and sci- 
ence, kultura  emphasized punctuality,   cleanliness, businesslike  direct- 
ness, polite modesty, and good,  but never showy, manners.'   It was this 
understanding   of  kultura   and  the  party's  passion  for  the  League of 
Time, with  its  promotion  of  time consciousness,  efficient  work  habits, 
and clock-driven    routine,  that  were  so brilliantly    caricatured   in  Eu- 
gene Zamiatin's   novel  We and that   later  became  the inspiration    for 
George Orwell's  1984. 
     What  strikes  an outside  observer  of this  revolution   in  culture  and 
architecture   is its emphasis on public  form-on      getting the visual  and 
aesthetic  dimensions  of the new  world  straight.   One can perhaps  see 
this best  in what  Stites calls  the "festivals  of  mustering"  organized  by 
the cultural  impresario   of the early Soviet  state, Anatoly Luna~harsky.~ 
In  the outdoor  dramas  he produced,  the revolution   was reenacted  on 
a scale that  must have  seemed as large as the original,   with  cannons, 
bands,  searchlights,   ships  on  the   river,  four   thousand   actors,  and 
thirty-five   thousand  spectator^.^ Whereas the actual revolution   had all 
the usual  messiness of reality, the reenactment  called  for  military  pre- 
cision,  and  the various   actors were  organized  by  platoon  and  mobi- 

213
196 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


lized with   semaphore  and field  telephones.  Like  mass  exercises, the 
~ublic  spectacle gave a retroactive   order, purpose,  and central  direc- 
tion to the events, which  were designed to impress  the spectator, not to 
reflect  the  historical   facts.1Â If  one can  see in  Arakcheev's  military 
colonies an attempt  to prefigure,  to represent, a wished-for  order,  then 
perhaps Lunacharsky's  staged revolution   can be seen as a representa- 
tion of the wished-for  relationship  between  the Bolsheviks and the pro- 
letarian   crowd.   Little   effort  was   spared  to  see that   the  ceremony 
turned out right.  When Lunacharsky  himself  complained  that churches 
were being  demolished  for  the  May  Day celebrations,   Lazar  Kagan- 
ivich, the city  boss of Moscow, replied,  "And my aesthetics demand that 
the demonstration  processions from  the six districts  of Moscow  should 
all pour  into   Red Square at  the same time."ll   In  architecture,   public 
manners,  urban  design, and  public  ritual,   the emphasis  on a visible, 
rational,  disciplined   social facade  seemed to prevail.12 Stites suggests 
that  there is  some inverse  relation  between  this  public  face  of order 
and purpose and  the near anarchy  that  reigned in  society at large:  "As 
in the  case of all  such utopias,  its organizers  described  it  in  rational, 
symmetrical  terms,  in the mathematical   language of planning,  control 
figures, statistics,  projections   and precise commands.  As in the  vision 
of military   colonies,  which  the utopian   plan faintly   resembled, its  ra- 
tional  facade  barely  obscured  the oceans of  misery,  disorder,  chaos, 
corruption   and whimsicality   that went  with  it."13 
     One possible  implication    of Stites's assertion  is  that,  in some  cir- 
cumstances, what   I  call the  miniaturization     of order  may  be substi- 
tuted  for the  real  thing.  A facade  or a small,  easily  managed  zone of 
order  and conformity   may come to be an end  in itself;  the representa- 
tion may  usurp the  reality. Miniatures   and small  experiments  have, of 
course, an  important   role  in  studying  larger  phenomena.  Model  air- 
craft built  to  scale and wind tunnels  are essential steps in the design of 
new airplanes.   But when  the  two  are confused-when,      say, the gen- 
eral mistakes  the parade  ground  for  the battlefield   itself-the     conse- 
quences are potentially  disastrous. 


A Soviet-American    Fetish:  Industrial    Farming 

Before  plunging  into  a discussion  of  the practice   and logic  of  Soviet 
collectivization,   we should  recognize  that the  rationalization   of  farm- 
ing on  a huge, even national,  scale was part of a faith  shared by social 
engineers and agricultural    planners  throughout  the world.  l4 And they 
were conscious  of being  engaged in a common  endeavor. Like  the ar- 
chitects  of the  Congres Internationaux    dlArchitecture   Moderne,  they 

214
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 197 


kept in  touch through  journals,   professional  conferences,  and exhibi- 
tions. The connections  were strongest  between American  agronomists 
and  their   Russian  colleagues-connections       that  were  not   entirely 
broken  even  during   the  Cold  War. Working   in  vastly  different   eco- 
nomic  and political   environments,   the Russians tended  to be envious 
of the level  of capitalization,   particularly    in mechanization,   of Ameri- 
can farms  while  the Americans  were  envious  of the political   scope of 
Soviet planning.   The degree  to which  they  were  working  together  to 
create a new  world  of large-scale,  rational,   industrial   agriculture  can 
be judged by this  brief  account of their  relationship. 
     The high tide  of enthusiasm for  applying  industrial  methods to  agri- 
culture  in the  United  States stretched roughly  from   1910 to the end of 
the 1930s. Agricultural   engineers,  a new specialty,  were the main  car- 
riers  of this  enthusiasm;  influenced  by  currents  in  their  parent  disci- 
pline, industrial   engineering,  and most  particularly   by the doctrines  of 
the prophet  of time-motion   studies, Frederick  Taylor, they reconceptu- 
alized  the farm  as a  "food  and fiber  factory."15 Taylorist  principles   of 
scientifically   measuring  work  processes in  order to  break them  down 
into  simple,  repetitive   motions  that  an  unskilled  worker   could  learn 
quickly  might  work  well  enough on  the factory  floor,16 but their appli- 
cation  to  the variegated   and  nonrepetitive   requirements   of  growing 
crops  was  questionable.   Agricultural    engineers  therefore  turned   to 
those aspects  of farm  operation   that  might  be more  easily  standard- 
ized.  They tried   to rationalize    the  layout  of farm   buildings,   to stan- 
dardize  machinery   and  tools,  and  to promote   the  mechanization   of 
major  grain  crops. 
     The professional   instincts  of the agricultural   engineers  led them to 
try  to replicate  as much as possible the features  of the modem  factory. 
This impelled  them  to insist  on enlarging  the scale of  the typical  small 
farm  so that it could  mass-produce standard  agricultural  commodities, 
mechanize  its  operation,  and  thereby,  it was  thought,  greatly  reduce 
the unit  cost of production.17 
     As we  shall see later, the  industrial   model was  applicable  to some, 
but  not all,  of agriculture.   It  was nonetheless applied  indiscriminately 
as a creed  rather  than  a  scientific  hypothesis  to  be examined  skepti- 
cally.  The modernist   confidence  in  huge scale,  centralization   of  pro- 
duction,   standardized  mass commodities,   and mechanization   was  so 
hegemonic  in the leading  sector of industry  that  it became an article  of 
faith  that  the same principles   would  work,  pari  passu, in  agriculture. 
      Many  efforts  were  made to  put  this  faith  to  the test.  Perhaps the 
most  audacious was  the Thomas Campbell  "farm"   in Montana,  begun 
-or,     perhaps  I should  say, founded-in      191 8.18 It was an industrial 

215
198 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


farm in  more  than one respect.  Shares were  sold by prospectuses  de- 
scribing the enterprise  as an "industrial   opportunity  "; J. P. Morgan, the 
financier, helped to raise $2 million  from the public.  The Montana Farrn- 
ing  Corporation   was a  monster  wheat  farm   of ninety-five   thousand 
acres, much of it  leased from  four Native  American  tribes.  Despite the 
private  investment,   the  enterprise   would  never  have  gotten  off  the 
ground  without   help  and subsidies  from  the  Department   of Interior 
and the United  States Department  of Agriculture   (USDA). 
     Proclaiming   that  farming   was  about  90 percent  engineering   and 
only 10 percent agriculture,   Campbell set about standardizing   as much 
of his operation  as possible. He  grew wheat  and flax,  two hardy  crops 
that needed little  if  any attention  between planting   and harvest time.19 
The land  he farmed  was the  agricultural    equivalent  of  the bulldozed 
site of  Brasilia.   It  was virgin   soil, with   a natural   fertility   that  would 
eliminate  the need for  fertilizer.  The topography   also vastly simplified 
matters:   it  was  flat,  with   no  forests,   creeks,  rocks,  or   ridges  that 
would   impede the  smooth  course  of  machinery   over  its  surface.  In 
other  words,  the  selection  of  the simplest,   most  standardized  crops 
and the  leasing of something  very  close to  a blank  agricultural   space 
were calculated  to  favor the  application   of industrial   methods.  In the 
first  year  Campbell   bought  thirty-three    tractors,   forty   binders,   ten 
threshing  machines, four  combines,  and one hundred  wagons; he em- 
ployed about  fifty men most  of the year, but hired  as many as two hun- 
dred during  the  peak season.20 
     This  is  not  the  place  to  chronicle    the  fortunes   of  the  Montana 
Farming  Corporation,   and in  any event  Deborah  Fitzgerald  has done 
so splendidly.*l  Suffice it  to note that  a drought  in the second year  and 
the elimination   of a government  support   for prices  the following   year 
led to a collapse  that cost J. P. Morgan  $1 million.  The  Campbell  farm 
faced other problems  besides weather and prices: soil differences, labor 
turnover, the difficulty  of finding  skilled, resourceful workers  who would 
need little   supervision.   Although  the  corporation    struggled  on  until 
Campbell's death in  1966, it provided  no evidence that industrial   farms 
were  superior  to family   farms  in  efficiency  and  profitability.   The  ad- 
vantages industrial  farms  did have over  smaller producers  were  of an- 
other kind.  Their  very size gave them an edge in access to credit,  polit- 
ical influence  (relevant  to taxes, support  payments,  and the avoidance 
of foreclosure),  and marketing   muscle. What  they gave away in agility 
and quality  labor  they often made up for  in their  considerable  political 
and economic  clout. 
     Many  large industrial  farms  managed along scientific  lines were  es- 
tablished  in  the  1920s and Some1930~.~~  of them were  the stepchil- 

216
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 199 


dren of  depression foreclosures  that  left banks  and insurance  compa- 
nies holding  many farms  they could  not  sell. Such "chain  farms,"  con- 
sisting of  as many as six hundred  farmsteads  organized  into  one inte- 
grated  operation  (one  farm  to  farrow   pigs,  say, and another  to  feed 
them out, along  the lines of contemporary   "contract  farming"  for  poul- 
try),  were quite  common,  and buying  into  them  was a speculative  in- 
vestment.23 They proved no more  competitive  to  the family  farm  than 
did Campbell's corporation.   In fact, they were  so highly capitalized  that 
they were  vulnerable   to  unfavorable  credit   markets  and  lower  farm 
gate prices,  given  their   high  fixed  costs in  payroll   and interest.   The 
family  farm  could,  by  contrast,  more easily  tighten  its  belt and  move 
into  a subsistence mode. 
     The  most  striking   proposal   designed  to  reconcile   the  American 
small-property   regime   with  huge  economies  of  scale and  scientific, 
centralized  management  was  that of  Mordecai  Ezekial  and  Sherman 
Johnson in  1930. They outlined   a "national  farming   corporation"   that 
would  incorporate  all  farms. It  would  be vertically  integrated  and cen- 
tralized  and  "could  move raw  farming   materials  through  the  individ- 
ual farms  of the country,  could  establish production   goals and quotas, 
distribute  machinery,  labor  and capital,  and move farm  products  from 
one region  to  another  for  processing  and  use. Bearing  a  striking  re- 
semblance to  the industrial   world,  this  organizational   plan was a sort 
of gigantic   conveyor  belt."24 Ezekial  was no  doubt  influenced   by his 
recent  tour  of Russian  collective  farms  as well  as by the plight   of the 
depression-stricken   economy. Johnson and  Ezekial were  hardly  alone 
in calling  for  centralized  industrial  farming  on a massive scale, not just 
as a response to economic crisis  but as a matter  of confidence in  an in- 
eluctable  high-modernist   future.  The following  expression  of that con- 
fidence  is  fairly  representative:   "Collectivization    is  posed by  history 
and  economics.  Politically,   the small  farmer   or peasant  is a  drag  on 
progress.  Technically, he is as antiquated  as the small  machinists  who 
once  put  automobiles   together  by  hand  in  little  wooden  sheds.  The 
Russians have been the first  to see this clearly, and to adapt themselves 
to historical   nece~sity."~~ 
      Behind  these admiring  references  to Russia was  less a specifically 
political   ideology than a shared high-modernist   faith. That faith  was re- 
inforced  by  something  on the order  of an  improvised,  high-modernist 
exchange program.   A great many  Russian agronomists  and engineers 
came to the  United  States, which they  regarded as the Mecca of indus- 
trial   farming.   Their   tour  of  American  agriculture    nearly  always  in- 
cluded  a visit  to Campbell's  Montana  Farming  corporation    and to  M. 
L.  Wilson,  who  in  1928 headed  the Department   of Agricultural    Eco- 

217
200 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


nomics  at  Montana  State  University   and  later   became a  high-level 
official  in  the  Department   of Agriculture    under  Henry  Wallace.  The 
Russians were so taken with Campbell's  farm that  they said they would 
provide him  with  1 million   acres if he would  come to the Soviet  Union 
and demonstrate  his farming  methodsz6 
     Traffic  in  the  other  direction   was just  as brisk.  The  Soviet  Union 
had hired  thousands of American  technicians  and engineers  to help in 
the design of various  elements of Soviet  industrial   production,  includ- 
ing the production   of tractors  and other  farm  machinery.  By 1927, the 
Soviet  Union  had  also  purchased  twenty-seven   thousand  American 
tractors.  Many of  the American  visitors,  such as Ezekial,  admired  So- 
viet  state farms,  which   by  1930 offered  the  promise  of  collectivized 
agriculture  on a massive scale. The Americans were  impressed not just 
by the sheer  size of the state  farms but  also by  the fact  that technical 
specialists-agronomists,     economists,  engineers, statisticians-were, 
it seemed, developing  Russian  production   along  rational,  egalitarian 
lines. The  failure  of the  Western market  economy  in  1930 reinforced 
the attractiveness  of the Soviet experiment.   Visitors traveling   in either 
direction  returned  to their  own country  thinking   that they had seen the 
future.27 
     As Deborah  Fitzgerald  and  Lewis  Feuer argue,  the attraction   that 
collectivization   held  for American   agricultural   modernizers  had  little 
to do with  a belief  in Marxism  or  an affinity  for  Soviet life.28 "Rather it 
was because the  Soviet idea  of growing   wheat  on an industrial   scale 
and in  an industrial   fashion  was similar   to American   ideas about the 
direction  American   agriculture   should  take.'Iz9 Soviet collectivization 
represented,  to these American  viewers,  an enormous  demonstration 
project  without  the  political   inconveniences  of American  institutions; 
"that  is, the Americans  viewed  the  giant  Soviet farms  as huge experi- 
ment  stations  on  which  Americans   could  try  out  their  most  radical 
ideas for  increasing  agricultural   production,   and, in particular,   wheat 
production.  Many  of the things they wished  to learn more  about simply 
could  not be tried  in  America,  partly  because it would  cost  too much, 
partly  because no suitable large  farmsite  was available,  and partly  be- 
cause many farmers  and farm  laborers would  be alarmed  at the impli- 
cations of  this                                         Thee~perimentation."~~ hope was that the Soviet exper- 
iment  would  be to  American  industrial    agronomy  more  or less what 
the Tennessee Valley Authority   was to  be to  American  regional  plan- 
ning:  a proving  ground  and a possible model  for adoption. 
     Although  Campbell  did not  accept the Soviet  offer of a vast demon- 
stration  farm,  others  did. M.  L. Wilson,  Harold  Ware  (who had exten- 
sive experience  in the  Soviet  Union),  and Guy  Riggin  were invited  to 

218
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 20 1 


plan a  huge mechanized  wheat  farm  of some 500,000  acres of  virgin 
land.  It  would  be,  Wilson  wrote  to  a friend,   the  largest mechanized 
wheat farm   in the  world.  They  planned  the entire  farm   layout,  labor 
force, machinery  needs, crop rotations, and lockstep work  schedule in a 
Chicago hotel room in two  weeks in December 1928.31 The fact that they 
imagined that such a farm could be planned in  a Chicago hotel room un- 
derlines their  presumption   that the key issues were  abstract, technical 
interrelationships   that were context-free.  As Fitzgerald perceptively  ex- 
plains: "Even  in the U.S., those plans would  have been optimistic,  actu- 
ally, because they  were based on  an unrealistic   idealization  of  nature 
and human  behavior.  And  insofar  as the  plans  represented  what  the 
Americans would  do if  they had millions  of  acres of flat land,  lots of la- 
borers, and  a government commitment   to spare no expense in meeting 
production  goals, the plans were designed for an abstract, theoretical kind 
ofplace.  This agricultural   place, which  did not  correspond to  America, 
Russia, or  any  other  actual  location,  obeyed the  laws  of physics  and 
chemistry, recognized  no political  or ideological  stance."32 
     The  giant  sovkhoz,  named  Verblud,  which   they  established  near 
Rostov-on-Don,   one  thousand   miles   south  of   Moscow,  comprised 
375,000 acres that  were to be sown to wheat.  As an economic proposi- 
tion,  it was an abject  failure,  although  in the early years  it did produce 
large  quantities  of  wheat.  The detailed  reasons  for  the failure   are of 
less interest  for our  purposes than  the fact that  most  of them could  be 
summarized  under  the rubric   of context. It  was the  specific context  of 
this  specific  farm  that defeated  them.  The farm,  unlike  the  plan,  was 
not a hypothecated,  generic,  abstract farm  but  an unpredictable,  com- 
plex, and particular   farm,  with  its own unique  combination  of soils, so- 
cial  structure,  administrative   culture, weather,  political  strictures,  ma- 
chinery,  roads,  and the work  skills  and habits  of its  employees. As we 
shall  see, it  resembled Brasilia   in  being  the kind  of  failure  typical   of 
ambitious   high-modernist   schemes for  which  local  knowledge,  prac- 
tice,  and context  are considered  irrelevant   or at best an  annoyance to 
be circumvented. 


Collectivization     in  Soviet  Russia 

     What we have here isn't a mechanism, it's people living here. You can't get 
     them squared around until they get themselves arranged. I used to think of the 
     revolution as a steam engine, but now I see that it's not. 
      -Andrei  Platonov, Chevengur 

The collectivization    of Soviet agriculture   was an extreme  but diagnos- 
tic  case of  authoritarian    high-modernist   planning.   It  represented  an 

219
202 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


unprecedented  transformation   of agrarian   life  and production,   and it 
was imposed by  all the brute  force  at the state's disposal.  The officials 
who directed  this  massive change,  moreover,  were operating   in rela- 
tive ignorance   of the  ecological,  social,  and economic   arrangements 
that underwrote   the rural  economy. They were flying  blind. 
     Between early  1930 and  1934, the Soviet state waged  a virtual  war 
in the  countryside.   Realizing   that  he could  not  depend  on the  rural 
Soviets to   "liquidate   the kulaks"   and  collectivize,   Stalin  dispatched 
twenty-five  thousand  battle-tested,  urban  Communists   and proletari- 
ans with  full  powers  to requisition   grain,  arrest  resistors,  and collec- 
tivize.  He was convinced  that  the peasantry was  trying  to bring  down 
the Soviet  state. In  reply to  a personal  letter  from  Mikhail   Sholokhov 
(author  of And Quiet Flows  the Don) alerting  him  to the fact  that peas- 
ants along the Don were on the verge of starvation,  Stalin  replied,  "The 
esteemed grain  growers  of your  district   (and not  only of your  district 
alone) carried   on  an 'Italian   strike'   (ital'ianka),   sabotage!,  and were 
not loathe  to leave the workers  and the Red Army  without   bread. That 
the sabotage was  quiet  and outwardly   harmless  (without   bloodshed) 
does not change the fact  that the  esteemed grain growers  waged what 
was virtually   a 'quiet'   war  against Soviet  power.  A war  of starvation, 
dear comrade  Shol~khov."~~ 
     The human  costs of that  war  are still  in  dispute, but  they were  un- 
deniably  grievous.  Estimates  of the death  toll  alone, as a result  of the 
"dekulakization"   and collectivization   campaigns  and the  ensuing fam- 
ine, range from  a "modest" 3 or 4 million   to, as some current Soviet fig- 
ures indicate,  more than  20 million.   The higher estimates  have, if any- 
thing,  gained  more  credibility    as new archival   material   has become 
available.  Behind  the deaths  rose a level of  social disruption   and vio- 
lence that  often  exceeded that of  the civil  war  immediately   following 
the revolution.  Millions   fled to the cities or  to the frontier,  the infamous 
gulag was vastly enlarged,  open rebellion  and famine raged  in much of 
the countryside,  and more  than half  of the nation's  livestock (and draft 
power)  was ~laughtered.~~ 
     By  1934, the state had "won" its war with  the peasantry. If ever a war 
earned the  designation  "Pyrrhic   victory,"  this  is the  one. The sovkhoz 
(state farms)  and kolkhoz  (collective  farms)  failed  to deliver  on any  of 
the specifically  socialist  goals envisioned by Lenin,  Trotsky, Stalin,  and 
most  Bolsheviks.  They were  an evident  failure   in  raising  the level  of 
grain  production   or  of producing   cheap and  abundant  foodstuffs  for 
an urban,  industrializing   workforce.   They failed to  become the techni- 
cally efficient  and innovative  farms that  Lenin  had anticipated.  Even in 
the realm  of electrification,   Lenin's  touchstone  of modernization,   only 

220
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 203 


one in twenty-five   collective  farms had  electricity   by the eve of World 
War 11. By no measure had the  collectivization   of  agriculture   created 
"new  men and  women"  in  the  countryside  or  abolished  the  cultural 
difference  between the country  and  the city. For the  next half-century, 
the yields  per  hectare of  many  crops were  stagnant  or  actually  infe- 
rior  to  the levels  recorded  in  the  1920s or  the levels  reached  before 
the Rev~lution.~~ 
     At another level,  collectivization  was, in  a curious state-centric  way, 
a qualified  success. Collectivization   proved a rough-and-ready   instru- 
ment for  the twin  goals of traditional   statecraft:  appropriation   and po- 
litical  control.  Though the Soviet  kolkhoz may have failed  badly at gen- 
erating  huge surpluses of foodstuffs,  it  served well  enough as a means 
whereby  the  state could  determine   cropping   patterns,  fix  real  rural 
wages, appropriate  a large share of whatever  grain was produced,  and 
politically   emasculate the c~untryside.~~ 
     The great  achievement, if  one can call  it that,  of the  Soviet state in 
the agricultural    sector was to  take a social  and economic  terrain   sin- 
gularly  unfavorable  to appropriation   and control   and to create institu- 
tional  forms  and  production   units  far  better  adapted  to  monitoring, 
managing,  appropriating,   and controlling   from  above. The rural   soci- 
ety that the Soviet  state inherited  (and for  a time encouraged)  was one 
in which  the allies of the czarist state, the great landlords  and the aristo- 
cratic  officeholders,  had been swept away and been replaced  by small- 
holding  and middle  peasants, artisans, private  traders,  and all  sorts of 
mobile  laborers   and  lumpen  elements.37 Confronting   a tumultuous, 
footloose, and  "headless" (acephalous) rural  society which  was hard to 
control  and which  had few political   assets, the Bolsheviks, like  the sci- 
entific  foresters,  set about  redesigning  their   environment   with  a few 
simple goals in mind.  They created, in place of what  they had inherited, 
a new  landscape  of  large,  hierarchical,   state-managed  farms  whose 
cropping  patterns   and procurement   quotas were  centrally  mandated 
and whose population   was, by law, immobile.  The system thus  devised 
served for nearly  sixty years as a mechanism for procurement   and con- 
trol  at  a massive cost  in stagnation,   waste, demoralization,    and eco- 
logical  failure. 
     That  collectivized  agriculture   persisted for  sixty years was a tribute 
less to the  plan of  the state than  to the  improvisations,   gray  markets, 
bartering,   and ingenuity  that  partly  compensated  for  its failures.  Just 
as an  "informal    Brasilia,"   which  had  no  legitimate   place  in  official 
plans,  arose to make the  city viable,  so did  a set of informal   practices 
lying  outside the formal  command  economy-and    often  outside Soviet 
law   as well-arise      to  circumvent    some  of  the  colossal  waste  and 

221
204 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


inefficiencies  built  into  the system.  Collectivized  agriculture,   in  other 
words,  never quite  operated  according  to  the hierarchical    grid  of its 
production  plans  and procurements. 
     What  seems clear, in the  brief  account  that  follows,  is that  collec- 
tivization  per  se cannot  be laid  solely at  the feet of  Stalin,  though  he 
bore much  responsibility    for  its  exceptional  speed and                     A br~tality.~~ 
collectivized  agriculture   was  always part  of the Bolshevik   map of the 
future,  and  the great  procurement   struggles  of  the late   1920s could 
hardly  have had  any other  outcome  in  the  context of  the decision  to 
pursue forced-draft   industrialization.   The party's  high-modernist  faith 
in great  collectivist  schemes survived  long  after the  desperate impro- 
visations of  the early  1930s. That faith,  which  claimed  to be both  aes- 
thetic  and scientific,   is clearly  visible   in a much  later  agrarian   high- 
modernist dream:  namely, Khrushchev's virgin  lands scheme, launched 
well  after  Stalin's  death  and after  his  crimes  during   collectivization 
had been publicly   denounced.  What  is remarkable  is  how  long these 
beliefs and structures  prevailed,  in  spite of the evidence of  their mani- 
fold failings. 


Round One: The Bolshevik State and the Peasantry 

    It  sometimes seems to me that if I could persuade everyone to say "system- 
    atize" each time he wanted to say "liberate" and to say "mobilization" every 
    time he wanted to say "reform" or "progress" I would not have to write long 
    books about government-peasant interaction in Russia. 
     -George Yaney, The Urge to Mobilize 

     In  the particular   book quoted  above, Yaney was writing  about  pre- 
revolutionary   Russia,  but  he  could  just  as easily  have been  writing 
about  the  Bolshevik  state.  Until   1930,  the continuities    between  the 
rural  policy  of the  Leninist  state and  its czarist  predecessor are  more 
striking  than their  differences.  There is the  same belief in reform  from 
above and in  large, modern,   mechanized  farms as the  key to produc- 
tive agriculture.   There  is also,  alas, the  same high level  of ignorance 
about a very complex rural  economy  coupled, disastrously, with  heavy- 
handed raids  on the  countryside  to seize grain  by force.  Although  the 
continuities   persisted  even after  the institutional    revolution   of  1930, 
what is  new about the  all-out  drive  to collectivize  is  the revolutionary 
state's willingness  to completely  remake  the institutional   landscape  of 
the agrarian  sector, and at whatever  cost. 
     The new Bolshevik  state faced a rural  society that  was significantly 
more  opaque,  resistant,   autonomous,   and hostile   than  the  one  en- 
countered  by the czarist  bureaucracy.   If the  czarist  officials  had  pro- 

222
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 205 


voked massive defiance and evasion  in their  "crude  Muscovite  tribute- 
collecting  methods"  during   World  War I,39 there was  every reason to 
suspect that the Bolsheviks  would  have an even harder time  squeezing 
grain from  the  countryside. 
     If  much of  the countryside  was hostile  to the  Bolsheviks,  the senti- 
ment was  abundantly   reciprocated.   For Lenin,   as we  have seen, the 
Land Decree, which  gave to the peasants the land that  they had seized, 
had been a strategic maneuver  designed to buy  rural  quiescence while 
power was  consolidated;  he had  no doubt  that  peasant smallholdings 
must eventually   be abolished  in  favor  of  large, socialized   farms.  For 
Trotsky, the sooner what he called "the Russia of icons and cockroaches" 
was transformed and  "urbanized," the better. And for  many of the newly 
urbanized, rank-and-file  Bolsheviks, the abolition  of the "dark  and back- 
ward peasant world"   was a "vital  part  of their  own  emerging personal 
and working-class  identity.'I4O 
     The peasantry was virtually   terra incognita  to  the Bolsheviks. At the 
time of the revolution,   the party had throughout   Russia a grand total of 
494 "peasant"  members (most  of them probably  rural   intelligent~ia).~~ 
Most villagers   had never  seen a Communist,   although  they may  well 
have heard  of the Bolshevik   decree confirming   peasant ownership   of 
the land  that  had been seized.  The only  revolutionary   party  with  any 
rural  following   was the  Social  Revolutionaries,   whose populist   roots 
tended to  make them unsympathetic   to Lenin's  authoritarian   outlook. 
     The effects of the revolutionary   process itself had rendered rural  so- 
ciety more  opaque and  hence more difficult   to  tax. There had  already 
been a sweeping  seizure of  land,  dignified,  retrospectively,   by the  in- 
appropriate  term  "land  reform."  In fact,  after the  collapse of the offen- 
sive into  Austria  during  the  war and  the subsequent  mass desertions, 
much of the land  of the gentry and church,  as well as "crown  land," had 
been absorbed by the peasantry. Rich peasants cultivating  independent 
farmsteads  (the  "separators"  of  the  Stolypin  reforms)   were typically 
forced back  into  the village  allotments,  and rural   society was in  effect 
radically  compressed.  The very rich  had been dispossessed, and many 
of the  very poor  became smallholders   for  the first  time  in  their  lives. 
According  to one  set of figures,  the number  of landless  rural  laborers 
in Russia  dropped by half,  and the  average peasant holding  increased 
by 20 percent  (in  the Ukraine,   by 100 percent).  A total  of  248 million 
acres was confiscated, almost  always by local initiative,   from  large and 
small  landlords  and  added to peasant  holdings,  which  now  averaged 
about 70 acres per  househ~ld.~~ 
     From  the  perspective  of  a  tax official   or  a  military   procurement 
unit,  the situation  was nearly  unfathomable.   The land-tenure  status in 

223
206 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


each village  had changed  dramatically.   Prior  landholding    records,  if 
they existed at  all, were  entirely  unreliable   as a guide to  current  land 
claims. Each village  was unique  in many respects, and,  even if it could 
in principle   have  been "mapped,"  the population's   mobility   and mili- 
tary turmoil   of the period  all  but guaranteed  that the  map would  have 
been made obsolete in six months or  sooner. The combination,  then, of 
smallholdings,   communal  tenure,  and  constant  change,  both  spatial 
and temporal,  operated  as an impenetrable barrier   to any finely  tuned 
tax system. 
     Two additional   consequences of  the revolution   in  the countryside 
compounded  the difficulties   of state officials.  Before  1917, large peas- 
ant farms  and landlord  enterprises  had produced  nearly  three-fourths 
of the grain  marketed for  domestic use and export.  It was this  sector of 
the rural  economy that  had fed the cities. Now  it was gone. The bulk  of 
the remaining  cultivators  were consuming  a much larger  share of their 
own  yield.  They would  not  surrender   this  grain  without   a fight.  The 
new, more  egalitarian  distribution    of land  meant that  extracting   any- 
thing like  the czarist  "take" in grain  would  bring  the Bolsheviks in  con- 
flict  with  the subsistence needs of small and  middle  peasants.43 
     The  second and  perhaps  decisive  consequence  of  the  revolution 
was that  it  had  greatly  enhanced  the  determination   and  capacity  of 
peasant communities  to resist the state. Every revolution  creates a tem- 
porary  power  vacuum when  the power  of the  ancien regime  has been 
destroyed  but   the  revolutionary    regime  has  not  yet  asserted  itself 
throughout   the  territory.    Inasmuch   as the  Bolsheviks   were  largely 
urban  and found  themselves fighting  an extended civil  war,  the power 
vacuum  in much of the  countryside  was unusually  pronounced.  It  was 
the first  time,  as Orlando Figes reminds  us, that  the villages,  although 
in straitened  circumstances,   were free to  organize their   own affairs.44 
As we have  seen, the villagers  typically   forced  out  or burned   out the 
gentry, seized the land  (including   rights  to common  land  and forests), 
and forced the separators  back into the communes.  The villages tended 
to behave as autonomous  republics,  well  disposed to the  Reds as long 
as they confirmed the  local "revolution,"  but  strongly resistant  to forced 
levies of grain,  livestock, or men  from any quarter.  In this  situation,  the 
fledgling  Bolshevik  state, arriving  as it often  did in the form  of military 
plunder,  must have been experienced by the peasantry  as a reconquest 
of the countryside  by the state-as    a brand  of colonization  that  threat- 
ened their  newly  won autonomy. 
      Given the political   atmosphere in  rural  Russia, even a government 
having  detailed knowledge  of the agricultural   economy, a local  base of 
support,  and a knack  for diplomatic   tact  would  have confronted  great 

224
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 207 


difficulties.  The Bolsheviks  lacked  all  three. A tax  system based on in- 
come or wealth was possible only with  a valid cadastral  map and an up- 
to-date census, neither  of which  existed.  Farm income,  moreover, var- 
ied greatly  with  regard  to  yields  and prices  from  year to  year, so any 
income  tax  would  have  had  to  have been  exceptionally   sensitive  to 
these conditions  in  local harvests.  Not  only did  the new  state lack the 
basic information   it needed to govern  efficiently,  it had also largely  de- 
stroyed the czarist state apparatus  of local officials,  gentry, and special- 
ists in finance and agronomy  who had managed, however inadequately, 
to collect taxes and grain  during  the war. Above all, the Bolsheviks gen- 
erally  lacked  the village-level   native  trackers  who  could have  helped 
them to find  their  way in a hostile  and confusing  environment.  The vil- 
lage soviets that were  supposed to play this  role were  typically  headed 
by villagers  loyal  to local  interests  rather  than  to the center.  An alter- 
native organ,  the  Committee  of the Rural  Poor  (kombedy), which pur- 
ported to  represent the rural  proletariat   in local class struggles, was ei- 
ther  successfully   coopted  by  the  village   or  locked  in   often  violent 
conflict  with  the village  soviet.45 
     The  inscrutability    of  the mir   to  most  Bolshevik  officials   was not 
simply  a result of their  urban  social origins  and the admitted  complex- 
ity of  village  affairs.  It was also  the product  of a conscious  local strat- 
egy, one that had demonstrated   its protective  value in  earlier  conflicts 
with  the gentry  and the state. The local commune  had a long history  of 
underreporting    its  arable  land   and  overreporting    its  population   in 
order  to appear as poor and untaxable  as p0ssible.~6 As a result of such 
deception  in the census of 19 17, the arable land in Russia had been un- 
derestimated  by about  15 percent.  Now,  in addition   to the woodland, 
pastures,  and open land  that the  peasantry had  earlier  converted  into 
cropland  without   reporting   it,  they had an  interest  in hiding  much  of 
the land  they  had just  seized  from  the landlords   and  the gentry.  Vil- 
lage committees   did, of  course, keep records  for  allocating  allotment 
land,  organizing  communal  plow  teams, fixing  grazing  schedules, and 
so on, but  none of these records  was made available  either  to officials 
or to  the kombedy.  A popular  saying  of the period   captures the  situa- 
tion  nicely:  the peasant  "owned  by decree"  (that is,  the Land  Decree) 
but  "lived secretly." 
     How   did   the  hard-pressed   state find   its  way  in   this  labyrinth? 
Where possible,  the Bolsheviks  did try  to establish large  state farms or 
collective  farms.  Many  of these were  "Potemkin  collectives"  designed 
merely  to  give  cover  of  legitimacy   to  existing  practices.   But  where 
they  were not  a sham,  they revealed  the political   and  administrative 
attractiveness   of a radical   simplification    of the  landholding   and tax- 

225
208 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


paying unit  in  the countryside.   Yaney's summary of  the logic  entailed 
is impeccable. 

     From a  technical point  of  view  it was  infinitely  easier to  plough up 
     large units of land without  regard  for individual  claims  than it was to 
     identify each family allotment, measure its value in the peasants' tradi- 
     tional terms, and then painfully  transpose it from  scattered strips into 
     a consolidated farm. Then, too, a capital  city administrator   could not 
     help but  prefer  to supervise and  tax large  productive  units  and not 
     have to deal with  separate farmers. . . . The collective had  a dual ap- 
     peal to authentic  agrarian reformers.  They represented a social ideal 
     for rhetorical  purposes, and at the same time they seemed to simplify 
     the technical problems of land reform and state control.47 

In the turmoil   of  19 17 - 2 1, not many such agrarian experiments  were 
possible, and  those that  were  attempted  generally   failed  badly. They 
were, however,  a straw  in  the  wind  for  the full   collectivization    cam- 
paign a decade later. 
     Unable to  remake the rural  landscape,  the Bolsheviks turned  to the 
same methods of forced  tribute  under  martial   law that  had been used 
by their  czarist  predecessors  during  the war.  The term  "martial   law," 
however, conveys an orderliness  that  was absent from actual  practice. 
Armed bands  (otriady)-some     authorized   and others  formed  sponta- 
neously by hungry  townsmen-plundered       the countryside  during   the 
grain crisis  of spring  and summer  19 18, securing whatever they could. 
Insofar  as grain procurement   quotas were set at all,  they were "purely 
mechanical  accounting figures  originating   from an unreliable  estimate 
of arable  and  assuming  a good  harvest." They  were, from   the begin- 
ning,  "fictional   and The~nfulfillable."~~   procurement   of  grain  looked 
more like  plunder  and theft  than  delivery and  purchase. Over  150 dis- 
tinct  uprisings,  by one estimate,  erupted  against the  state's grain seiz- 
ures. Since  the Bolsheviks  had,  in  March   191 8, renamed themselves 
the Communist  Party, many  of the rebels claimed  to be for  the Bolshe- 
viks and the Soviets (whom  they associated with  the Land  Decree) and 
against the  Communists.  Lenin,   referring  to  the peasant  uprisings  in 
Tambov, the Volga, and the  Ukraine,  declared that  they posed more  of 
a threat than  all the  Whites put together.  Desperate peasant resistance 
had  in  fact  all but  starved  the  cities  out  of  existence,49 and in  early 
192 1, the party, for the  first time,  turned  its guns on its  own rebellious 
sailors  and workers  in  Kronstadt.   At this point  the  beleaguered party 
beat a tactical  retreat, abandoning  War Communism  and  inaugurating 
the New  Economic  Policy (NEP), which condoned  free trade and small 
property.  As Figes notes, "Having  defeated the White  Army, backed  by 
eight  Western powers,  the Bolshevik  government   surrendered  before 

226
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 209 


its  own  peasants."50 It  was  a  hollow   victory.   The  deaths  from  the 
hunger  and epidemics  of  1921 -22 nearly  equaled  the toll  claimed  by 
World War  I and the civil  war  combined. 


Round Two: High Modernism and Procurement 

     The  conjunction    of  a  high-modernist    faith   in  what   agriculture 
should look  like  in the future  and  a more immediate   crisis of state  ap- 
propriation   helped  to spark  the all-out  drive  to  collectivization   in  the 
winter  of  1929-30.  In  focusing  on just these two  issues, we must nec- 
essarily leave  to others  (and they  are a multitude)   the gripping   issues 
of the human  costs of collectivization,   the struggle  with  the "right"   op- 
position   led by  Bukharin,   and  whether   Stalin  intended   to  liquidate 
Ukrainian   culture  as well as many Ukrainians. 
     There  is no doubt that  Stalin  shared Lenin's faith  in industrial   agri- 
culture.  The aim of collectivization,   he said in May  1928, was "to trans- 
fer  from  small,  backward,  and  fragmented  peasant  farms to  consoli- 
dated, big,  public  farms,  provided   with  machines,  equipped  with  the 
data of science, and capable of producing  the greatest quantity  of  grain 
for the  market."51 
     This  dream had  been deferred  in 192 1. There had been some hope 
that a gradually  expanding  collective  sector in the  1920s could provide 
as much  as one-third  of the country's  grain  needs. Instead,  the collec- 
tivized  sector (both the state farms  and the collective  farms), which  ab- 
sorbed  10 percent of the labor  force,  produced  a dismal 2.2 percent  of 
gross farm   producti~n.~~ When  Stalin  decided  on a crash  industrial- 
ization   program,   it  was clear  that  the  existing  socialist   agricultural 
sector  could  not provide   either  the food  for  a rapidly  growing   urban 
workforce   or the grain  exports necessary to finance the  imported  tech- 
nology  needed  for  industrial   growth.   The middle  and  rich  peasants, 
many  of them  newly  prosperous  since the New  Economic  Policy, had 
the grain  he needed. 
      Beginning  in  1928, the official   requisition  policy  put  the state on a 
collision   course  with   the peasantry.  The mandated   delivery  price  of 
grain  was  one-fifth   of the  market  price,   and the  regime  returned   to 
using  police  methods as peasant resistance  ~tiffened.~~ When the pro- 
curements   faltered,  those who  refused  to  deliver  what  was required 
(who,   along with   anyone  else opposing  collectivization,    were  called 
kulaks,  regardless  of  their  economic  standing)   were arrested  for  de- 
portation   or  execution, and  all their   grain,  equipment,  land,  and live- 
stock  were seized and sold. The orders  sent to those directly   in charge 
of  grain  procurement   specified that  they were  to arrange  meetings  of 

227
210 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


poor peasants to make it seem as if the initiative   had come from below. 
It  was in  the  context  of  this  war  over  grain,   and not  as  a carefully 
planned policy  initiative,   that the decision  to force  "total"  (sploshnaia) 
collectivization   was  made in  late  1929.  Scholars  who agree  on little 
else are in accord on this  point:  the overriding   purpose of collectiviza- 
tion was to  ensure the seizure of  grain.  Fitzpatrick  begins her  study of 
the collectives  with  this  assertion:  "The main  purpose  of collectiviza- 
tion was to increase state grain  procurements  and reduce the peasants' 
ability  to withhold  grain  from  the market.  This purpose was obvious to 
peasants from the start,  since the collectivization   drive  of the winter  of 
1929-30  was the culmination   of more  than two years of bitter  struggle 
between the peasants and the state over grain   procurement^."^^ Robert 
Conquest  concurs:  "The  collective   farms  were  essentially   a chosen 
mechanism for  extracting  grain  and other  products."55 
     It  appears that this  was also how the vast  majority  of the peasantry 
saw it, judging  from  their  determined  resistance and what  we know  of 
their views.  The seizure of grain threatened  their  survival.  The peasant 
depicted in Andrei  Platonov's  novel about collectivization   sees how the 
seizure of  grain  negates the  earlier  land  reform:   "It's  a sly  business. 
First you  hand over  the land,  and then  you take away  the grain,  right 
down to  the last  kernel. You  can choke on  land like  that!  The muzhik 
doesn't have anything   left from  the  land  except the horizon.   Who are 
you fooling?"56At  least as threatening was the loss of what little  margin 
of social and economic  autonomy the peasantry  had achieved since the 
revolution.  Even poor peasants were afraid  of collectivization,   because 
"it  would  involve   giving  up one's land  and  implements   and working 
with  other families,  under  orders,  not temporarily,   as in the  army, but 
forever-it      means the barracks   for  life."57 Unable to rely  on  any sig- 
nificant  rural  support,   Stalin  dispatched  twenty-five  thousand  "pleni- 
potentiaries"  (party  members) from  the towns and factories  "to destroy 
the peasant commune  and replace  it by a collective  economy  subordi- 
nate to the state," whatever  the cost.58 


Authoritarian High-Modernist  Theory and the Practice of Serfdom 

     If  the move to  "total"  collectivization   was  directly  animated  by the 
party's  determination   to seize the land  and the  crops sown  on it  once 
and for  all,  it  was a determination   filtered   through  a high-modernist 
lens. Although   the Bolsheviks   might  disagree  about means,  they  did 
think  they  knew exactly  what  modern  agriculture   should  look  like  in 
the end; their  understanding  was  as much visual  as scientific. Modern 
agriculture   was to be large  in scale,  the larger  the better;  it  was to be 

228
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 2 1 1 


highly  mechanized  and  run  hierarchically    along  scientific,   Taylorist 
principles.  Above all,  the cultivators   were to resemble  a highly  skilled 
and disciplined  proletariat,  not a peasantry. Stalin  himself, before prac- 
tical  failures  discredited   a  faith  in  colossal projects,   favored  collec- 
tive  farms  ("grain  factories")   of  125,000  to 250,000   acres, as in  the 
American-assisted  scheme described  earlier.59 
     The utopian  abstraction  of the  vision was  matched, on the  ground, 
by wildly   unrealistic   planning.   Given  a map  and  a few  assumptions 
about scale and  mechanization,   a specialist  could  devise a plan  with 
little  reference  to local  knowledge  and  conditions.  A  visiting  agricul- 
tural  official  wrote  back  to Moscow  from  the  Urals in  March   1930 to 
complain  that,  "on the  instruction   of the Raion  Executive  Committee, 
twelve  agronomists  have  been sitting  for  twenty   days composing  an 
operational-production   plan  for the non-existent  raion  commune with- 
out ever  leaving  their  offices  or  going out  into  the  field.'I6O When an- 
other bureaucratic   monstrosity  in Velikie  Lukie  in the west proved  un- 
wieldy,  the   planners   simply  reduced   the  scale  without    sacrificing 
abstraction.   They divided  the  80,000-hectare  scheme  into  thirty-two 
equal squares  of 2,500 hectares  each, with   one square constituting   a 
kolkhoz.  "The squares were drawn   on a map without   any reference to 
actual villages, settlements,  rivers, hills,  swamps or other  demographic 
and topological  characteristics   of the land.'l6' 
     Semiotically,   we cannot  understand  this  modernist   vision  of agri- 
culture   as an isolated  ideological   fragment.   It  is  always seen as  the 
negation  of the  existing  rural  world.   A kolkhoz  is meant  to  replace  a 
mir  or village, machines  to replace horse-drawn  plows  and hand labor, 
proletarian   workers   to replace  peasants, scientific   agriculture    to re- 
place folk  tradition    and superstition,   education  to  replace  ignorance 
and malokulturnyi,    and  abundance  to replace  bare  subsistence.  Col- 
lectivization   was meant to spell the  end of the peasantry and  its way of 
life. The introduction   of  a socialist economy  entailed a cultural   revolu- 
tion as well;  the "dark"  narod, the peasants who were perhaps the great 
remaining,   intractable   threat   to the  Bolshevik   state,  were  to  be re- 
placed by rational,   industrious,  de-Christianized,   progressive-thinking 
kolkhoz  workers6*  The scale of collectivization   was intended  to efface 
the peasantry  and its institutions,   thereby  narrowing   the gulf between 
the  rural   and urban   worlds.   Underlying   the whole   plan,  of  course, 
was the assumption  that  the great  collective  farms would  operate  like 
factories  in  a centralized   economy, in  this case fulfilling    state orders 
for  grain   and  other   agricultural    products.   As if  to  drive   the  point 
home, the  state confiscated roughly  63 percent  of the entire  harvest  in 
1931. 

229
212 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


     From  a central  planner's  perspective,   one great advantage  of col- 
lectivization  is  that the  state acquired  control  over how  much  of each 
crop was sown.  Starting  with  the  state's needs for grains,  meat, dairy 
products, and so on, the state could theoretically   build those needs into 
its instructions   to  the collective  sector.  In  practice,  the  sowing plans 
imposed  from  above  were  often  wholly  unreasonable.   The land  de- 
partments,  which  prepared the  plans, knew  little  about the  crops they 
were mandating,  the  inputs  needed to grow  them locally,  or  local soil 
conditions.  Nevertheless, they had quotas to  fill,  and fill them  they did. 
When, in  1935, A. Iakovlev,  the head of  the Central  Committee's  agri- 
cultural  department,  called for  collective farms  to be managed by "per- 
manent cadres"  who "genuinely  knew  their  fields," he implied  that  the 
present incumbents  did           We catch a glimpse of  the disasters from 
the Great Purges of  1936-37,  when  a certain  amount  of peasant criti- 
cism  of kolkhoz   officials   was briefly   encouraged  in   order  to  detect 
"wreckers."  One kolkhoz   was instructed   to plow   meadows and  open 
land, without   which  they  could  not  have fed their   livestock.  Another 
received sowing  orders that  doubled  the previous  acreage allotted  for 
hay fields by taking  in private  plots  and  quicksand^.^^ 
     The planners clearly  favored monoculture   and a far-reaching,  strict 
division  of  labor.  Entire   regions,  and  certainly   individual    kolkhozy, 
were increasingly   specialized,  producing   only,  say, wheat,  livestock, 
cotton, or  potatoes.65 In the case of livestock  production,   one kolkhoz 
would  produce   fodder  for  beef  cattle  or  hogs  while  another   would 
raise and breed  them. The logic  behind  kolkhoz  and regional   special- 
ization  was roughly  comparable   to the  logic behind  functionally   spe- 
cific urban  zones. Specialization  reduced  the number  of variables that 
agronomists  had to consider;  it  also increased the  administrative  rou- 
tinization   of  work   and  hence the  power   and  knowledge  of  central 
officials. 
     Procurement   followed   a comparable   centralizing    logic.  Starting 
with the  needs of the plan and a usually  unreliable  estimate of the har- 
vest, a series of  quotas  for  every oblast,  raion,  and  kolkhoz  was me- 
chanically  derived.  Each kolkhoz   then claimed  that  its quota  was im- 
possible to fulfill   and  appealed to have  it lowered.  Actually  meeting  a 
quota, they  knew  from  bitter  experience,  only  raised the  ante for  the 
next round  of procurements.  In  this respect collective  farmers  were in 
a more precarious  situation  than industrial   workers,  who still  received 
their wages and  ration  cards whether  or  not the factory  met its  quota. 
For the  kolkhozniki,  however,  meeting  the  quota might   mean starva- 
tion.  Indeed, the great  famine  of 1933-34   can only be called  a collec- 
tivization  and procurement   famine.  Those who were  tempted to make 

230
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 2 13 


trouble  risked running   afoul of  a more grisly  quota: the  one for kulaks 
and enemies of the state. 
     For  much  of the  peasantry,  the authoritarian    labor  regime  of  the 
kolkhoz  seemed not only to jeopardize   their  subsistence but  to revoke 
many of the  freedoms they had won  since their  emancipation   in  186 1. 
They compared  collectivization   to  the serfdom  their  grandparents  re- 
membered.  As one early sovkhoz  worker  put  it,  "The sovkhozy are al- 
ways forcing  the  peasant to work;  they  make the  peasants weed their 
fields. And  they don't  even give  us bread or  water.  What will   come of 
all  this? It's  like  barschina   [feudal  labor  dues]  all  over  again."66 The 
peasants began to say that  the acronym  for  the All-Union   Communist 
Party-VKP-stood      for  vtoroe krepostnoe pravo, or "second serfdom."67 
The parallel  was not a mere figure  of speech; the resemblances to  serf- 
dom were  remarkable.68 The kolkhoz members  were required  to  work 
on the  state's land  at least  half-time   for  wages, in  cash or  kind,  that 
were  derisory.   They  depended  largely   on  their   own   small  private 
plots  to grow  the food  they  needed (other  than  grain),  although   they 
had little   free time  to cultivate   their  garden~.6~ The quantity to be de- 
livered  and  price  paid  for  kolkhoz  produce  was  set by the  state. The 
kolkhozniki   owed annual  corvke labor  dues for roadwork  and  cartage. 
They were obliged  to  hand over  quotas of milk,   meat, eggs, and so on 
from  their  private  plots.  The collective's  officials,  like  feudal  masters, 
were wont  to  use kolkhoz  labor for  their  private  sidelines  and had,  in 
practice  if not  in law,  the arbitrary   power to  insult,  beat, or deport  the 
peasants. As they were under  serfdom,  they were legally  immobilized. 
An internal  passport system was reintroduced   to clear the cities of  "un- 
desirable  and unproductive   residents"  and to make sure that  the peas- 
antry  did  not  flee. Laws  were  passed to deprive  the  peasantry  of the 
firearms  they  used for hunting.   Finally,  the kolkhozniki   living   outside 
the  village  nucleus  (khutor   dwellers),  often  on  their  old  farmsteads, 
were  forcibly  relocated,   beginning  in  1939. This  last resettlement   af- 
fected more  than half  a million   peasants. 
     The  resulting  labor  rules, property   regime,  and settlement  pattern 
did  in  fact resemble  a cross between  plantation   or  estate agriculture 
on one hand  and feudal  servitude on  the other. 
     As a vast, state-imposed  blueprint  for  revolutionary   change, collec- 
tivization   was  at least as notable  for  what  it  destroyed  as for  what  it 
built.  The initial   intent  of  collectivization   was not just  to  crush the re- 
sistance  of well-to-do  peasants and  grab their  land;  it  was also to  dis- 
mantle  the  social  unit  through  which   that  resistance  was expressed: 
the mir.  The peasant commune  had typically  been the vehicle for  orga- 
nizing  land  seizures during   the revolution,   for  orchestrating   land use 

231
214 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


and grazing,   for  managing  local   affairs  generally,  and  for  opposing 
 procurement^.^^ The party  had every reason  to fear  that  if the  collec- 
tives were based on the traditional  village,  they would  simply  reinforce 
the basic unit  of peasant  resistance. Hadn't  the  village  soviets quickly 
escaped the state's control? Huge collectives, then,  had the decided ad- 
vantage of bypassing  village  structures  altogether.  They  could be run 
by a board  consisting   of cadres  and  specialists.  If  the  giant  kolkhoz 
was then divided  into sections, one specialist  could be named manager 
of each, "'like  the bailiffs   in  the old days'  [of serfdom]  as [one]  . . . re- 
port wryly  noted.'j71 Eventually, except in frontier   areas, practical  con- 
siderations prevailed  and a majority   of the kolkhozy coincided  roughly 
with  the earlier  peasant commune  and its lands. 
     The kolkhoz  was not, however, just window   dressing hiding  a tradi- 
tional  commune.  Almost  everything  had changed.  All the  focal points 
for an  autonomous  public  life  had been eliminated.   The tavern,  rural 
fairs and  markets, the  church,  and the local  mill  disappeared;  in their 
places stood the kolkhoz office, the public meeting room, and the school. 
Nonstate  public  spaces  gave way  to the  state  spaces of government 
agencies, albeit local  ones. 
     The concentration,   legibility,  and  centralization   of social organiza- 
tion and  production  can be seen in the  map of the state farm  at Verch- 
nyua Troitsa  (Upper  Trinity)   in Tver  Oblast (figure  28).72 Much of the 
old village  has been removed from the center  and relocated on the  out- 
skirts (legend  reference  1       Two-story  apartment  houses containing 
sixteen flats  each  have been clustered  near  the  center  (legend refer- 
ences 13, 14, 15; see also figure 29), while the local  administration   and 
trade  center, school,  and  community  building,    all public   institutions 
run by  the state, lie  close to the center  of the new  grid.  Even allowing 
for  the exaggerated  formalism   of the  map, the  state farm  is a  far cry 
from  the sprawl  and autonomous   institutional   order  of the  precollec- 
tivized village;   a photograph  showing  the old-style  housing and  a lane 
illustrates  the stark  visual contrast  (see figure  30). 
     Compared  to Haussmann's retrofitting   of the physical  geography of 
Paris to make  it legible  and to  facilitate  state domination,   the  Bolshe- 
viks  retrofitting   of rural   Russia was far more  thoroughgoing.   In place 
of  an  opaque  and   often  obstinate   mir,   it  had  fashioned   a  legible 
kolkhoz.  In  place of myriad  small  farms,  it  had created  a single, local 
economic  unit.74 With the establishment  of  hierarchical   state farms,  a 
quasi-autonomous   petite  bourgeoisie   was  replaced  with   dependent 
employees.  In  place, therefore,   of  an agriculture    in which   planting, 
harvesting,  and  marketing   decisions were  in  the hands  of individual 
households, the  party-state  had built  a rural   economy where  all these 
decisions  would  be made  centrally.  In  place  of a  peasantry  that  was 

232
                                             [To view this image, refer to  
                                             the print version of this title.] 
                                              
                                              
                                              









28. Plan of the state farm at Verchnyua Troitsa (Upper Trinity)  in Tver  Oblast, 
showing the following  sites: 1, community center; 2, monument; 3, hotel; 4, local 
administration  and trade center; 5, school; 6, kindergarten;  7-8, museums; 9, 
shop; 10, bathhouse; 11, old wooden house moved from new construction area; 
12, old village; 13-15, two- and three-story houses; 16, garage (private); and 17, 
agricultural  sites (farm, storage, water tower, and so on) 












                                             [To view this image, refer to  
                                             the print version of this title.] 
                                              
                                              
                                              










29.  At Verchnyua Troitsa, one of the new village's two-story houses, each con- 
taining  sixteen flats 

233
                                                  [To view this image, refer to  
                                                  the print version of this title.] 
                                                   
                                                   
                                                   




























30.  Houses  along  a lane  in  the  old  village  at  Verchnyua   Troitsa 

234
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 2 17 


technically  independent,   it had  created  a peasantry  that was  directly 
dependent on the state for  combines and  tractors,  fertilizer,  and seeds. 
In  place  of a  peasant economy  whose  harvests,  income,  and  profits 
were well-nigh  indecipherable,   it had  created units  that were  ideal for 
simple and direct appropriation.   In place of a variety of social units  with 
their  own  unique  histories  and  practices,  it  had created  homologous 
units of  accounting  that  could  all be fitted  into  a national  administra- 
tive grid.  The logic was not  unlike  the management scheme at McDon- 
ald's: modular,   similarly   designed  units  producing   similar   products, 
according  to a common  formula  and work  routine.  Units  can easily be 
duplicated  across  the landscape,  and the inspectors  coming  to  assess 
their  operations  enter legible  domains  which  they can evaluate with   a 
single checklist. 
     Any  comprehensive   assessment of  sixty  years  of  collectivization 
would  require both  archival  material  only now becoming  available and 
abler  hands than  my own.  What  must  strike  even a casual student  of 
collectivization,    however,  is how  it  largely  failed  in  each of  its  high- 
modernist   aims,  despite  huge investments   in  machinery,  infrastruc- 
ture, and  agronomic  research. Its  successes, paradoxically, were in the 
domain  of traditional   statecraft.  The state managed to get its  hands on 
enough  grain  to push  rapid  industrialization,     even while  contending 
with  staggering  inefficiencies,  stagnant yields,  and ecological  devasta- 
                  Theti~n.~~ state also managed, at great human cost, to eliminate the so- 
cial basis of organized,  public  opposition from  the rural  population.  On 
the other  hand, the state's capacity  for realizing  its vision  of large,  pro- 
ductive,  efficient,   scientifically   advanced  farms  growing  high-quality 
products  for  market was virtually   nil. 
     The  collectives that  the state had  created manifested  in  some ways 
the facade of modern  agriculture  without   its substance. The farms were 
highly   mechanized  (by world   standards),  and  they were managed  by 
officials   with  degrees  in  agronomy  and  engineering.  Demonstration 
farms   really  did   achieve large  yields,   although   often  at prohibitive 
costs.76 But in the end none  of this could  disguise the  many failures  of 
Soviet  agriculture.   Only three sources  of these failures are noted  here, 
because they will  concern  us later.77 First, having taken  from the peas- 
ants  both their  (relative)  independence  and  autonomy as well  as their 
land  and grain,  the  state created  a class of essentially unfree  laborers 
who  responded with  all the forms  of foot-dragging  and resistance prac- 
ticed  by unfree  laborers  everywhere.  Second, the  unitary  administra- 
tive  structure   and  imperatives   of central   planning  created  a  clumsy 
machine  that  was utterly   unresponsive  to local  knowledge  or  to local 
conditions.   Finally, the  Leninist  political   structure  of the Soviet  Union 

235
218 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


gave agriculture  officials  little  or  no incentive  to adapt to,  or negotiate 
with,  its rural  subjects. The very  capacity  of the state to  essentially re- 
enserf rural producers,  dismantle  their institutions,   and impose its will, 
in the crude sense of appropriation,   goes a long way toward  explaining 
the state's failure   to  realize  anything   but  a simulacrum   of  the high- 
modernist  agriculture  that  Lenin  so prized. 


State Landscapes  of  Control   and  Appropriation 

Drawing  on the history  of Soviet collectivization,    I shall now  venture a 
few more  frankly  speculative  ideas about  the institutional   logic  of au- 
thoritarian   high  modernism.   Then  I shall  suggest  a way  of grasping 
why such  massive social  bulldozing   may have  worked  tolerably   well 
for  some purposes but  failed  dismally   for  others-an     issue to  which 
we shall return  in  later  chapters. 
     The headlong  drive  to collectivization    was animated   by the short- 
term  goal  of seizing  enough  grain   to push  rapid   indu~trialization.~~ 
Threats and  violence  had  worked,   up to  a point,   for  the  harvests of 
1928 and  1929, but  each annual  turn  of the  screw  elicited  more  eva- 
sion and resistance from  the peasantry. The bitter  fact  was that the So- 
viet state faced an exceptionally  diverse population   of commune-based 
smallholders  whose economic  and social  affairs were  nearly unintelli- 
gible to the center.  These circumstances offered  some strategic  advan- 
tages to a peasantry waging  a quiet guerrilla   war  (punctuated  by open 
revolt)  against state  claims. The  state, under  the existing  property  re- 
gime, could only look  forward  to a bruising struggle  for grain  each year, 
with  no assurance of success. 
     Stalin  chose this  moment  to  strike  a decisive  blow.  He imposed  a 
designed and legible rural   landscape that would  be far more  amenable 
to appropriation,    control,  and  central  transformation.   The social  and 
economic landscape he had in  mind was of course the industrial   model 
of advanced  agriculture-large,      mechanized  farms  run  along factory 
lines and coordinated   by state planning. 
     It  was a case of the "newest state" meeting the  "oldest class" and at- 
tempting  to remake  it  into some reasonable  facsimile  of a proletariat. 
Compared to the peasantry, the proletariat   was already relatively   more 
legible  as a class, and not  just because  of its  central  place in  Marxist 
theory. The proletariat's   work  regimen  was regulated by factory  hours 
and by man-made  techniques of production.    In the case of new indus- 
trial  projects   like the  great  steel complex  at  Magnitogorsk,  the  plan- 
ners could  start virtually   from  zero, as with  Brasilia.  The peasants, on 
the other hand,  represented a welter of  small, individual   household en- 

236
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 2 19 


terprises.  Their  settlement  pattern  and social  organization   had a his- 
torical  logic  far deeper than  that of  the factory  floor. 
     One purpose  of collectivization   was to destroy  these economic and 
social units,  which  were hostile  to state control,  and  to force the  peas- 
antry  into  an institutional   straitjacket   of the  state's devising. The new 
institutional   order  of  collective  farms  would  now be  compatible  with 
the state's purposes of appropriation   and directed  development.  Given 
the quasi-civil   war  conditions   of the countryside,   the solution  was  as 
much a product  of military   occupation  and "pacification"   as of "social- 
ist tran~formation.'"~ 
     It  is possible,  I believe,  to say something  more generally  about  the 
"elective  affinity"  between  authoritarian   high  modernism   and certain 
institutional    arrangement^.^^ What  follows  is rather  crude  and provi- 
sional, but  it will  serve as a point of departure.  High-modernist   ideolo- 
gies embody  a doctrinal   preference  for  certain  social  arrangements. 
Authoritarian   high-modernist   states, on  the other  hand,  take the next 
step. They attempt,  and  often succeed, in  imposing  those preferences 
on their  population.   Most of the  preferences can be  deduced from  the 
criteria   of legibility,   appropriation,    and  centralization   of  control.   To 
the degree  that  the  institutional    arrangements  can  be readily   moni- 
tored  and  directed   from  the  center  and  can  be easily  taxed  (in  the 
broadest sense of taxation), then they are likely  to be promoted. The im- 
plicit  goals  behind  these comparisons  are not  unlike  the goals of  pre- 
modern  statecrafkS1 Legibility, after  all,  is a prerequisite  of appropria- 
tion  as well as of authoritarian  transformation.   The difference,  and it  is 
a crucial  one, lies in the wholly  new scale of ambition   and intervention 
entertained  by high  modernism. 
     The principles   of standardization,  central  control,  and synoptic  leg- 
ibility   to the center  could  be applied to  many other  fields; those  noted 
in  the  accompanying  table  are  only  suggestive.  If  we were  to  apply 
them  to education,  for  example, the most  illegible  educational   system 
would  be completely informal,  nonstandardized  instruction  determined 
entirely  by local  mutuality.  The most legible  educational  system would 
resemble  Hippolyte    Taine's description   of  French   education   in  the 
nineteenth  century,  when "the  Minister  of Education   could pride  him- 
self, just by  looking  at his watch, which  page of Virgil   all schoolboys of 
the  Empire  were annotating   at that  exact moment."82 A more exhaus- 
tive table  would  replace the dichotomies  with  more elaborate  continua 
(open  commons  landholding,   for  example, is  less legible  and taxable 
than  closed  commons landholding,   which   in  turn  is less legible  than 
private  freeholding,  which  is less legible than  state ownership).  It is no 
coincidence  that the more  legible or  appropriable  form  can more read- 

237
220  RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


Legibility of Social Groups, Institutions,  and Practices 

                                             Illegible                                              Legible 

Settlements             Temporary encampments of            Permanent villages, 
                                hunter-gatherers, nomads,               estates, and plantations 
                                slash-and-burn cultivators,               of sedentary peoples 
                                pioneers, and gypsies 
                                Unplanned cities and                        Planned grid cities and 
                                neighborhoods: Bruges in                neighborhoods: 
                                1500, medina of Damascus,            Brasilia,  Chicago 
                                Faubourg Saint-Antoine, 
                                Paris, in 1800 

Economic units        Small property, petite                       Large property 
                                bourgeoisie 
                                Small peasant farms                         Large farms 
                                Artisanal production                          Factories (proletariat) 
                                Small shops                                      Large commercial 
                                                                                         establishments 
                                Informal  economy,                           Formal economy, "on 
                                off  the books"                                  the books" 

Property                  Open commons, communal              Collective farms 
regimes                   Property 
                                Private property                                State property 
                                Local records                                    National cadastral survey 

Technical and 
resource organizations 
   Water                    Local customary use,                       Centralized dam, 
                                local irrigation  societies                   irrigation  control 
   Transportation      Decentralized webs                          Centralized hubs 
                                and networks 
   Energy                  Cow pats and brushwood                Large generating stations 
                                gathered locally or local                    in urban centers 
                                electric generating stations 
   Identification         Unregulated local naming                 Permanent patronyms 
                                customs 
                                No state documentation                    National system of iden- 
                                of citizens                                         tification  cards, docu- 
                                                                                         ments, or passports 



ily  be converted    into  a  source  of  rent-either        as private   property    or  as 
the  monopoly    rent  of  the  state. 


The  Limits     of Authoritarian        High    Modernism 

When  are  high-modernist       arrangements     likely   to  work   and  when   are 
they  likely   to  fail?  The  abject   performance     of  Soviet   agriculture     as an 
efficient    producer    of  foodstuffs    was,  in   retrospect,    "overdetermined" 

238
                                                                              Soviet Collectivization 22 1 


by many  causes having  little   to do  with  high  modernism   per  se: the 
radically  mistaken  biological   theories  of Trofim   Lysenko,  Stalin's ob- 
sessions, conscription  during  World  War 11, and the weather. And  it is 
apparent  that  centralized   high-modernist   solutions   can be  the most 
efficient,  equitable,   and satisfactory   for  many  tasks.  Space explora- 
tion,  the planning  of  transportation   networks,  flood  control,   airplane 
manufacturing,   and other  endeavors may  require  huge organizations 
minutely  coordinated  by  a few experts. The control   of epidemics  or of 
pollution   requires  a center  staffed by experts  receiving  and  digesting 
standard information    from hundreds  of reporting   units. 
     On the other hand, these methods seem singularly  maladroit  at such 
tasks as putting  a really good meal  on the table or  performing  surgery. 
This issue will  be addressed at  length in  chapter  8, but  some valuably 
suggestive  evidence  can be  gleaned  from   Soviet  agriculture.    If  we 
think  of particular   crops, it  is apparent  that collective  farms  were suc- 
cessful at growing  some crops, especially the  major grains:  wheat, rye, 
oats, barley,  and maize.  They  were notably   inefficient   at turning   out 
other products,  especially fruits,  vegetables, small livestock, eggs, dairy 
products,  and flowers.  Most of these crops  were supplied  from  the mi- 
nuscule private  plots of the kolkhoz  members, even at the height  of col- 
lectivization.^   The systematic  differences  between  these two categor- 
ies of crops helps  to explain  why their  institutional    setting might  vary. 
     Let  us take wheat  as an example  of what  I  will  call  a "proletarian 
crop"  and compare  it  with  red raspberries,  which   I think  of  as the ul- 
timate   "petit-bourgeois   crop."  Wheat  lends  itself  to  extensive  large- 
scale farming  and  mechanization.   One might  say that wheat  is to col- 
lectivized  agriculture  what  the Norway  spruce is to centrally  managed, 
scientific  forestry. Once planted,  it needs little  care until  harvest,  when 
a combine can cut  and thresh the grain  in one operation  and then blow 
it  into   trucks  bound   for  granaries  or   into  railroad    cars.  Relatively 
sturdy  in the  ground, wheat  remains  sturdy  once harvested.  It is rela- 
tively   easy to  store  for  extended  periods   with   only  small   losses to 
spoilage. The red raspberry  bush,  on the other hand,  requires  a partic- 
ular  soil  to be  fruitful;   it  must  be pruned   annually;  it  requires   more 
than  one picking,   and  it  is virtually    impossible  to  pick  by  machine. 
Once packed,  raspberries   last only  a few  days under  the  best condi- 
tions.  They will  spoil  within   hours  if packed  too tightly   or if  stored at 
too  high  a temperature.   At  virtually    every stage  the  raspberry  crop 
needs delicate handling   and speed, or all  is lost. 
      Little   wonder,  then,  that   fruits   and  vegetables-petit-bourgeois 
crops-were     typically   not grown  as kolkhoz  crops  but rather  as side- 
lines produced  by individual   households. The collective  sector in effect 

239
222 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


ceded such crops to those who had the personal interest, incentive,  and 
horticultural   skills  to grow  them successfully. Such  crops can, in  prin- 
ciple, be grown  by huge centralized   enterprises as well,  but they  must 
be enterprises that are elaborately  attentive to the  care of the crops and 
to the  care of  the labor  that  tends  them.  Even where  such  crops are 
grown on large farms,  the farms tend to be family enterprises  of smaller 
size than  wheat  farms  and  are  insistent  on  a stable,  knowledgeable 
workforce.  In  these situations,  the  small  family  enterprise  has, in  the 
terms of neoclassical  economics, a comparative  advantage. 
     Another  way in which  wheat production   is different  from  raspberry 
production   is that the  growing  of wheat  involves  a modest number  of 
routines  that,  because the  grain  is  robust,  allow  some  slack or  play. 
The crop will  take some abuse. Raspberry growers,  because successful 
cultivation   of their   crop  is complex  and the  fruit  is  delicate,  must be 
adaptive,  nimble,   and  exceptionally   attentive.   Successful  raspberry 
growing  requires,   in other  words,  a substantial   stock of  local knowl- 
edge and experience. These distinctions  will  prove germane to the Tan- 
zanian example, to  which we now  turn,  and later to  our understanding 
of local  knowledge. 

240
7      Compulsory               Villagization                in 
        Tanzania: 
        Aesthetics             and     Miniaturization 











The ujamaa village campaign in Tanzania from 1973 to 1976 was a 
massive attempt to permanently settle most of the country's population 
in villages, of which the layouts, housing designs, and local economies 
were planned, partly or wholly, by officials of the central government. 
We shall examine the Tanzanian experience for three reasons. First, the 
campaign was by most accounts the largest forced resettlement scheme 
undertaken in independent Africa up to that time; at least 5 million 
Tanzanians were re1ocated.l Second, documentation of the villagiza- 
tion process is abundant, thanks to the international interest in the ex- 
periment and the relatively open character of Tanzanian political life. 
Finally, the campaign was undertaken largely as a development and 
welfare project and not, as has often been the case, as part of a plan of 
punitive appropriation, ethnic cleansing, or military security (as in 
South Africa's forced removals and homeland schemes under apar- 
theid). Compared with Soviet collectivization, the ujamaa village cam- 
paign was a case of large-scale social engineering by a relatively be- 
nign and weak state. 
    Many other large-scale resettlement schemes can be subjected to 
much the same analysis. If, in the Tanzanian case, Chinese and Rus- 
sian models as well as Marxist-Leninist rhetoric play an important ide- 
ological role, we should not imagine that these were the only sources 
of inspiration for such schemes.* We could as easily have examined the 
huge forced removals under apartheid policies in South Africa, which 
were far more brutal and economically destructive. We could also have 
analyzed any number of the many large-scale capitalist schemes for 

241
224 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


production,   often  requiring   substantial   population   movements,  that 
have been undertaken with  international   assistance in poor c~untries.~ 
Julius Nyerere,  Tanzania's head of  state, viewed the  permanent  reset- 
tlement in  ways that were strikingly   continuous with  colonial  policy,  as 
we shall see, and his ideas about both mechanization  and economies of 
scale in agriculture  were  part and parcel  of international   development 
discourse  at the  time. That  discourse  of  modernization   was, in  turn, 
heavily  influenced  by the model  of the Tennessee Valley Authority,  the 
development  of capital-intensive   agriculture  in  the United  States, and 
the lessons of economic  mobilization   from World  War II.4 
     In  contrast  to  Soviet collectivization,    Tanzanian  villagization   was 
not conceived as an all-out war  of appropriation.   Nyerere made a point 
of warning   against the  use of administrative   or  military   coercion,  in- 
sisting  that  no one should  be forced,  against  his  or her  will,   into  the 
new villages. And  in fact the disruptions   and inhumanities  of Nyerere's 
program,  however  serious for  its victims,  were not  in the  same league 
as those inflicted   by Stalin.  Even  so, the ujamaa  campaign  was coer- 
cive and  occasionally  violent.  It  proved,  moreover,  a failure,  ecologi- 
cally as well  as economically. 
     Even in  this  "softer"  version of authoritarian   high  modernism,  cer- 
tain  family  resemblances stand  out. The first  is  the logic  of "improve- 
ment." As in the "unimproved"  forest,  the existing patterns of settlement 
and social  life  in  Tanzania were  illegible   and resistant  to the  narrow 
purposes of the  state. Only by radically   simplifying  the  settlement pat- 
tern was it  possible for the state to efficiently  deliver  such development 
services as schools, clinics,  and clean water.  Mere administrative   con- 
venience was hardly  the only  objective of state officials,  and that  is our 
second point.  The thinly   veiled subtext  of villagization   was  also to re- 
organize  human communities   in order  to  make them better  objects of 
political   control  and to  facilitate  the new  forms of  communal  farming 
favored  by state policy.  In this  context,  there are striking   parallels  be- 
tween what  Nyerere  and Tanzanian African  National   Union  (TANU) en- 
visioned and  the program  of agriculture  and settlement  initiated  by the 
colonial   regimes  in  East  Africa.  The  parallels  suggest  that  we have 
stumbled  across something  generic  about  the projects  of  the modern 
developmentalist   state. 
      Beyond this  second  criterion   of  bureaucratic   management,  how- 
ever, lay a third   resemblance that  had nothing  directly   to do with  effi- 
ciency. As in  the Soviet case, there was  also, I believe, a powerful   aes- 
thetic  dimension. Certain  visual representations  of order and efficiency, 
although  they may have made  eminent sense in some original  context, 
are detached from  their  initial  moorings.  High-modernist   plans tend to 

242
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 225 


"travel"  as an abbreviated   visual image  of efficiency   that is  less a sci- 
entific  proposition   to be tested than  a quasi-religious   faith  in  a visual 
sign or representation   of order.  As Jacobs suggested, they may substi- 
tute an apparent  visual order  for  the real thing.  The fact  that they look 
right  becomes more important   than whether  they  work;  or, better put, 
the assumption  is that  if the  arrangement  looks right,  it  will  also,  ips0 
facto, function   well.  The importance   of such representations   is mani- 
fested in a tendency to  miniaturize,   to create such microenvironments 
of apparent  order as model  villages, demonstration   projects,  new cap- 
itals, and  so on. 
     Finally,  like  Soviet collectives,  ujamaa  villages were  economic  and 
ecological failures.  For ideological  reasons, the designers of the new so- 
ciety had  paid virtually   no  attention  to the  local  knowledge and  prac- 
tices of  cultivators  and  pastoralists.  They had  also forgotten  the  most 
important   fact about  social  engineering:  its  efficiency  depends on the 
response and  cooperation   of real  human  subjects.  If  people  find  the 
new arrangement,   however efficient  in  principle,   to be hostile to  their 
dignity,  their   plans,  and  their  tastes, they  can  make it  an  inefficient 
arrangement. 


Colonial   High-Modernist     Agriculture     in East  Africa 

     For the colonial state did not merely aspire to create, under its control, a 
     human landscape of perfect visibility; the condition of this visibility was that 
     everyone, everything, had (as it were) a serial number. 
     -Benedict  Anderson, Imagined Communities 

Colonial  rule  has always been meant to  be profitable  for the  colonizer. 
This implied,   in a rural  society, stimulating   cultivation   for  the market. 
A variety  of  such means  as head taxes payable  in cash or  in  valuable 
crops, private-sector   plantations,  and the  encouragement  of white  set- 
tlers  were  deployed  to this  end.  Beginning  during   World  War I1  and 
especially  after  it, the  British  in  East Africa  turned  to  planning  large- 
scale development  projects  and mobilizing   the required  labor. A straw 
in  the wind   was the  conscription    of nearly  thirty   thousand  laborers 
for  work  on plantations  (particularly   sisal plantations)   during  the war. 
Postwar  schemes, although   they  often  had prewar   precedents,  were 
far  more  ambitious:   a gigantic   groundnut   (peanut)  scheme;  various 
rice,  tobacco, cotton, and  cattle schemes; and, above all, elaborate soil- 
conservation   plans  mandating  a strict  regimen  of  practices.  Resettle- 
ment  and  mechanization   were integral   parts  of  many  scheme^.^ The 
vast majority   of these projects  were neither  popular  nor  successful. In 
fact,  one of the  standard  explanations  for the  successes of TANU in the 

243
226 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


countryside  was precisely the  widespread  popular  resentment  against 
colonial  agricultural    policy-particularly         forced  conservation   mea- 
sures and such livestock regulations   as destocking and cattle  dipping.6 
     The most searching  account  of the  logic underlying   these schemes 
of "welfare  colonialism"  is William   Beinert's  study of neighboring  Mal- 
awi (then Nyasaland).'  Although  the ecology  is different  in Malawi,  the 
broad lines  of its  agricultural   policy  varied   little  from  that  attempted 
elsewhere in British   East Africa.  For our  purposes, what  is most strik- 
ing  is  the degree  to  which   the  assumptions  of  the  colonial   regime 
matched  those of the  independent,  and  far  more  legitimate,  socialist 
state of Tanzania. 
     The point  of  departure  for  colonial  policy   was a complete  faith  in 
what officials  took for  "scientific  agriculture"   on one hand and a nearly 
total skepticism   about the actual  agricultural    practices  of Africans  on 
the other. As a provincial   agricultural   officer   in the Shire  (Tchiri)  Val- 
ley put it,  "The African  has neither the training,   skill,  nor equipment  to 
diagnose his  soil erosion  troubles  nor  can he  plan the  remedial  mea- 
sures, which are based on scientific knowledge, and this  is where I think 
we rightly   come  in."8 Although  the  officer's   sentiment  was no  doubt 
perfectly  sincere,  one cannot  fail  to note  how  it justified,   at the same 
time,  the importance   and authority   of agricultural    experts over  mere 
practitioners. 
     In  keeping with  the planning  ideology  of the  time, the experts  were 
inclined  to propose elaborate  projects-a     "total development  scheme," 
a "comprehensive  land  usage ~cheme."~But there  were enormous  ob- 
stacles to imposing a complicated  and draconian  set of regulations  on a 
population  of cultivators   well  aware of environmental   constraints  and 
convinced  of the  logic of  their  own farming   practices.  Pushing  ahead 
autocratically   only courted protest  and evasion. It was in just  such con- 
texts that  the strategy of  resettlement  was so appealing.  Opening  new 
land  or repurchasing   the  estates of white  settlers  allowed  officials  to 
start from  scratch  with  compact village  sites and consolidated  individ- 
ual plots.  The newly recruited  settlers could  then be relocated  to a pre- 
pared,  legible   site  replacing   the  scattered  residences  and  complex 
tenure  patterns  found  elsewhere. The  more  the planners  filled  in  the 
details-that      is, the  more  that  huts were  built   or  specified,  sites de- 
marcated,  fields  cleared  and plowed,  and  plants  selected (and  some- 
times  sown)-the     greater  the  chance of  controlling    the scheme  and 
keeping it  to its designed  form. 
     The  planning  of  the lower   Shire  Valley along  these lines,  Beinert 
makes clear,  was not  an entirely  scientific   exercise. The  scheme's de- 
signers were  deploying  a set of technical  beliefs  associated with  mod- 

244
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 227 


ern agriculture,   very  few of  which  had been verified   in the  context of 
local conditions.  They were  also deploying  a set of aesthetic and visual 
standards, some of  them obviously  originating   in  the temperate  West, 
which  had come to symbolize an ordered  and productive  agriculture.  lo 
They were driven  by what  Beinert  called the "technical   imagination  of 
what might  be possible." 

     In the case of ridging  and bunding in the  lower river, the imagination 
     had an almost pictorial  quality: they looked forward  to a valley of reg- 
     ular fields, neatly ridged, between long straight contour bunds, below a 
     line of storm  drains topped by forests. It was a rectangular contoured 
     order which  would render  the environment  susceptible to control, fa- 
     cilitate technical  transformation of, and controls over, peasant agricul- 
     ture and, perhaps,  accord with  their  sense of planned beauty. It was 
     this  solution  which  would  make adequate production   possible. But 
     driven by their  technical conviction  and imagination,  they were unre- 
     sponsive to the  effects of their  interventions   on peasant society and 
     peasant cu1ture.l 

Aesthetic order  in the agricultural    and forest landscape was replicated 
in the  human  geography  as well.12 A series of  model villages,  spread 
evenly across the rectangular   grid of  fields and linked  by roads, would 
become the  center  of  technical  and  social  services. The  fields  them- 
selves were so arrayed  as to  facilitate  the  dryland  rotational   farming 
built  into   the  scheme. In   fact,  the  Shire  Valley  project  was  to  be a 
miniature   version   of the  Tennessee Valley  Authority,   complete  with 
dams along  the river  and sites indicated   for capital-intensive   process- 
ing plants.  A three-dimensional  model,  along the lines  of an architect's 
model of  a new town, was  constructed  to show, in miniature,   what  the 
whole project  would  look  like  when ~ompleted.~~ 
     The plans for  human settlement  and land use in the lower  Shire Val- 
ley "failed  almost completely."  The reasons for their  failure  presage the 
fiasco of  the ujamaa  villages.  Local  cultivators,   for  example,  resisted 
the generic  colonial  solution  to soil  erosion:  ridging.  As later  research 
showed, in this  context their  resistance was both economically  and eco- 
logically  sound.  Ridging  on sandy soil  was unstable, tending  to  create 
larger  erosion gullies in  the rainy  season, and ridging caused the soil to 
dry out  quickly  during  the dry season, encouraging white  ants to attack 
the roots of crops. Would-be  settlers hated the regimentation  of the gov- 
ernment  schemes; a "model settlement  with  communal  farming"   drew 
no voluntary  migrants  and had to be converted into a government maize 
farm using wage labor. The prohibitions  on farming  the settlement's rich 
marshland  (dimba)  deterred  volunteers.  Later,  officials  conceded that 
they, and not the peasants, had been mistaken in this  respect. 

245
228 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


     The lower   Shire  Valley project   miscarried   for  two  larger  reasons 
that are  crucial  to  our  understanding   of the  limits  of high-modernist 
planning.  The first   is that  the planners   operated  with  a model  of the 
agricultural   environment  that was standardized  for  the entire valley.  It 
was precisely this  assumption  that made  it possible to  specify the gen- 
eric, and  apparently  permanent,  solution  of a particular   dryland  rota- 
tion for  all  cultivators.  The  solution  was a static,  freeze-frame  answer 
to a dynamic and variegated  valley  environment.  In  contrast, the peas- 
ants possessed a flexible repertoire  of strategies depending  on the tim- 
ing and  extent of  the floods,  the microlocal   soil  compositions,  and  so 
on-strategies     that were  to some degree unique  to  each farmer,  each 
plot of land,  and to each growing season. The second reason behind the 
failure  was that the  planners also operated  with  a standardized  model 
of the cultivators   themselves, assuming  that all  peasants would  desire 
roughly  the same crop  mix,  techniques,  and  yields.  Such an assump- 
tion completely   ignored key variables,  such  as family size and  compo- 
sition,  sideline  occupations,  gender  divisions  of  labor,  and culturally 
conditioned   needs and  tastes. The  fact was  that  each  family  had  its 
own particular   mix of resources  and goals that would  affect its agricul- 
tural  strategy year by year in ways that  the overall  plan did not  provide 
for. As a plan, it was both aesthetically  pleasing to its inventors  and also 
precise and consistent within  its own  strict parameters.  As a scheme for 
development, however, it was the kind  of environmental  and social taxi- 
dermy that  doomed it  almost from  the start.  Ironically,   successful, vol- 
untary, pioneer  settlement outside  the government's purview  and  with- 
out any financial   assistance continued apace. This  disorderly, illegible, 
but  more  productive   settlement  was  castigated  as squatting  and  se- 
verely reproved,  although  without  much  practical  effect. 
     The abject failure  of the ambitious groundnuts  scheme in Tanganyika 
just after  World War  I1 is also instructive   as a dress rehearsal for mas- 
sive villagization.14 The joint  venture between  the United African  Com- 
pany  (a subsidiary   of  Unilever)  and  the  colonial   state proposed  the 
clearing  of no fewer than  3 million  acres of bush that  would, when  cul- 
tivated,  yield more  than half  a million   tons of peanuts  to be converted 
to cooking  oil  for  export.  The scheme was conceived  during  the post- 
war high  tide of faith  in the economic  prowess of a command  economy 
joined  to large  capitalist  firms.  By  1950, when less than  10 percent  of 
the acreage had been cleared and not  as many nuts had been grown  as 
seeds had been sown, the project  was abandoned. 
     The reasons for  the failure   were legion.  In  development  circles,  in 
fact,  the groundnuts  scheme  is one of  a handful  of legendary  failures 
cited  as examples of what  not  to do. At least  two of  the ingredients  of 

246
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 229 


this disaster  relate to  the failure  of  the lower  Shire  Valley project  and 
to the later disaster  of large-scale villagization.   First,  the design for the 
scheme was narrowly  agronomic  and abstract. Very general  figures for 
the tractor   hours  needed to  clear land,  the  amounts  of fertilizer    and 
pesticide needed to attain  a given yield  per acre,  and so forth  were ap- 
plied  to the  new  terrain.   No  detailed  mapping   of soils,  rainfall   pat- 
terns, or topography  and certainly   no experimental  trials  had been un- 
dertaken.  Field reconnaissance  was allotted  a mere nine  weeks, much 
of it  conducted  from  the  air!  The general  figures  proved  wildly   erro- 
neous precisely because they were heedless of the particularities   of the 
locality:  clayey  soil that  compacted  in  the  dry season, irregular   rain- 
fall, crop  diseases for which  there were  no resistant plant  varieties,  in- 
appropriate  machinery   for the soil  and terrain. 
     The second fatal  premise in  the design of the  scheme was its "blind 
faith  in machinery   and large-scale operation."15 The project's  founder, 
Frank Samuel,  had a motto:  "No  operation  will  be performed  by hand 
for  which  mechanical   equipment  is                              Thea~ailable."~~ scheme was es- 
sentially  a quasi-military   operation  perhaps  derived from  wartime   ex- 
perience and designed to be technically   self-contained.  The plan's level 
of abstraction   resembles that  of the  Soviet collective   wheat farm  laid 
out by Wilson,  Ware,  and Riggin  in  their  Chicago  hotel room  in  1928 
(see chapter 6). The groundnuts  scheme intentionally  bypassed African 
smallholders  in  order to  create a colossal industrial   farm  under  Euro- 
pean management.  As such,  the project  might   have reflected  relative 
factor  prices  on,  say, the plains  of Kansas,  but  surely  not in  Tangan- 
yika.  Had it  succeeded in growing   peanuts in  any quantities,  it  would 
have grown  them  on grossly uneconomic   terms.  Capitalist  high  mod- 
ernism  of the  utopian  kind  that  inspired  the  groundnuts  scheme  was 
no more  appropriate  to Tanzania than  would  be the template  of villag- 
ization  and collectivist,   socialist  production  that  inspired  Nyerere. 


Villages  and  "Improved"    Farming   in  Tanzania  Before   1973 

The vast majority   of  the Tanzanian  rural  population   was,  in terms  of 
legibility   and appropriation,   outside the  reach of the state. At indepen- 
dence, an estimated 1 1 out of 12 million rural  dwellers  lived "scattered" 
across  the landscape.  With  the  exception  of  densely settled  areas  in 
the  cool, wet  highlands  where  substantial   amounts  of coffee  and tea 
were  grown  and marketed,  much  of  the population   practiced   subsis- 
tence farming  or pastoralism.  Much  of what they  did sell was offered at 
local  markets  largely  outside the  ambit  of state  supervision  and taxa- 
tion.  The objective  of colonial  agricultural   policy   and also of the  inde- 

247
230 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


pendent state of Tanzania (and  seconded, early on, by the World  Bank) 
was to assemble  more of  the population   into  fixed,  permanent  settle- 
ments and to  promote  forms  of agriculture   that  would  yield  a greater 
marketable surplus,  especially for  export."  Whether  these policies took 
the form of private  ventures  or socialized  agriculture,  they were strate- 
gies designed, as Goran  Hyden  has said,  "to capture  the pea~antry."'~ 
The nationalist   regime  of TANU was, of course, much more  legitimate 
than its colonial  predecessor. But we should not  forget that much  of the 
popularity  of TANU in rural areas rested on its endorsement of resistance 
to the onerous  and mandatory  agricultural    regulations  of the  colonial 
state.19 As in Russia, the peasantry had taken advantage of the interreg- 
num at independence  to ignore  or defy policies  declared in  the capital. 
     At  the outset,  villagization    was  a central   goal  of Nyerere   and of 
TANU.The  purpose of village formation  was at this  stage threefold:  the 
delivery  of services;  the creation   of a more  productive,   modern  agri- 
culture;  and the encouragement  of communal,   socialist forms  of coop- 
eration.  Nyerere  outlined   the importance   of village  living   as early  as 
1962, in his  inaugural  address to Tanzania's parliament. 

     And if you ask me why the government wants us to live in villages, the 
     answer is just as simple: unless we do we shall not  be able to provide 
     ourselves with the things we need to develop our land and to raise our 
     standard of living.  We shall not be able to use tractors; we shall not be 
     able to provide schools for  our children;  we shall  not be able to build 
     hospitals, or  have clean drinking  water; it  will  be quite impossible  to 
     start small  village  industries, and  instead we shall  have to go on de- 
     pending on the towns for all  our requirements;  and if we had a plenti- 
     ful supply of electric power  we should never be able to connect it up to 
     each isolated homestead.20 

     By  1967, in  a major  policy  statement  called  "Socialism  and  Rural 
Development,"  Nyerere  elaborated  on the  specifically  socialist  aspect 
of the campaign  for village  living.  It was clear  to him that  if the present 
pattern  of capitalist   development  continued,   Tanzania would  eventu- 
ally develop  a class of wealthy "kulak"  (the  Russian term then  in vogue 
in TANU circles) farmers who would reduce their  neighbors  to the status 
of wage laborers. Ujamaa  villages (that is, socialist  cooperatives) would 
set the  rural  economy  on  a different   path.  "What   is here  being pro- 
posed," Nyerere  explained,  "is that  we  in Tanzania should  move from 
being  a  nation   of individual    peasant  producers   who  are  gradually 
adopting  the incentives  and ethics  of the capitalist   system. Instead we 
should gradually  become  a nation of ujamaa  villages where  the people 
co-operate  directly  in  small groups  and where  these small  groups co- 
operate together  for joint    enterprise^."^^ 

248
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 23 1 


     For Nyerere,  village  living,   development  services, communal  agri- 
culture,  and mechanization  were  a single indissoluble   package. Farm- 
ers who were scattered  hither  and yon  could not  easily be educated or 
treated  for common  illnesses,  could  not learn  the techniques  of  mod- 
ern agriculture,    could  not even cooperate,  unless  they first  moved  to 
villages.  He declared:   "The first  and  absolutely  essential thing   to do, 
therefore,  if we want to  be able to start using tractors  for  cultivation,   is 
to begin living  in proper villages.  . . . We shall not be able to use tractors 
[if we  have no  village^]."^^ Modernization  required,  above all,  physical 
concentration  into  standardized  units  that  the state might  service  and 
administer.  Little   wonder  that  electrification    and tractors,   those em- 
blems of  development,  were  on the tip  of  Nyerere's tongue  as well  as 
Lenin'~.~~ There is, I believe, a powerful  aesthetic  of modernization    at 
play here.  A modern  population  must  live  in communities   with  a cer- 
tain physical  layout-not     just  villages,  but proper villages. 
     Nyerere,  unlike  Stalin,  at  first  insisted that  the creation   of ujamaa 
villages be gradual  and  completely  voluntary.  He  imagined  that  a few 
families would  move their  houses to be closer together and would  plant 
their  crops nearby, after which  they might  open a communal  plot.  Suc- 
cess would   attract  others.   "Socialist   communities   cannot  be  estab- 
lished by compulsion,"  he declared.  They "can only be established  with 
willing   members;  the task  of leadership  and  of Government   is not  to 
try  and force this  kind  of development,  but to  explain, encourage,  and 
parti~ipate."~~ Later on, in  1973, having  gauged the general  resistance 
to villagization   on government  terms, Nyerere  would change his  mind. 
By then  the seeds of coercion had  been sown, by a politicized,   author- 
itarian  bureaucracy   and also  by Nyerere's underlying   conviction   that 
the peasants did not  know what  was good for them.  Thus, immediately 
after  disavowing   "compulsion"   in  the  sentence just  quoted,  Nyerere 
concedes, "It  may be possible-and    sometimes necessary-to    insist on 
all  farmers  in  a given  area growing   a certain  acreage of  a particular 
crop  until  they realize  that  this brings  them  a more secure living,   and 
then do not  have to be forced to grow  it."25 If the peasants could  not be 
persuaded to  act in  their  own interest,  they  might  have to be coerced. 
This logic  was a replication   of  that in  the  196 1 World Bank report  as- 
sociated  with  Tanganyika's first   five-year plan.  That  report  was laced 
with  the era's standard  discourse  about having  to overcome the  habits 
and  superstitions  of  a backward  and  obstinate  peasantry.  The report 
also doubted  whether  persuasion  alone would  get the job  done. While 
its authors  hoped  that  "social emulation,   cooperation,  and  the expan- 
sion of  community   development  services" would   transform  attitudes, 
they warned  darkly  that "where  incentives,  emulation  and propaganda 

249
232 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


are ineffective,   enforcement  or  coercive  measures of  an appropriate 
sort will  be ~onsidered."~~ 
     Scores of village  settlements and cultivation   schemes were initiated 
in the  1960s. Despite their great variety-some     were joint  ventures be- 
tween the state and foreign  firms,  some were government or  parastatal 
schemes, and others were spontaneous popular  initiatives-most     were 
judged to be failures  and closed down,  either  by decree or by attrition. 
Three  aspects of  these  schemes seem  especially  relevant   to  under- 
standing  the all-out  villagization   campaign  that began in  1973. 
     The first  was a penchant for creating  pilot  schemes. In itself this  ap- 
proach made  sense, since policy makers  could learn  what would  work 
and what would  not  before embarking  on more  ambitious plans.  Many 
such schemes, however,  became showpiece  demonstration   farms  ab- 
sorbing  huge amounts of  scarce equipment,  funds, and personnel.  For 
a time, a few  of these precious miniatures   of progress  and moderniza- 
tion  were maintained.   One influential   scheme involving   a mere  three 
hundred  settlers  managed to  acquire four  bulldozers,  nine  tractors,  a 
field car,  seven lorries, a maize mill,   an electric  generator, and a cadre 
of about fifteen administrators   and specialists,  150 laborers, and twelve 
 artisan^.^' It  was,  after  a fashion,  a  successful example  of a  modern 
farm, providing   that one overlooked  its truly legendary  inefficiency  and 
the fact that  it was irrelevant   to the Tanzanian situation. 
     The  second aspect prefiguring   the Tanzanian  experience was  that, 
given single-party  rule, an authoritarian   administrative   tradition,  and a 
dictator  (albeit  a rather benevolent  one)28 who wanted results, the nor- 
mal  bureaucratic   pathologies  were exaggerated.  Sites for  new  settle- 
ments were  often chosen, not by economic  logic,  but by finding   "blank 
spots" on  the map (preferably   near roads)  where the settlers  might  be 
dumped.29 In  the West Lake  (west  of Lake  Victoria)   region  (1970),  a 
member  of Parliament  and five  technical  specialists  descended briefly 
to design a four-year plan  (1 970- 1974) for all ujamaa villages  in the re- 
gion.  They were obviously  under great  pressure to please their  superi- 
ors by  promising  huge  increases in  cultivation   and production   which 
were  "utterly  unrealistic  and completely  out of touch  with  any possible 
development  in the village."30 The plans were promulgated without   any 
real  consultation   and were based  on abstract  assumptions  about ma- 
chine  use, days of labor, rates  of land  clearance, and  a new crop  regi- 
men, not  unlike the  groundnut  scheme or the Soviet collective  hatched 
in  a Chicago hotel room. 
      Finally,  where  the  pressure  was  greatest  to  create  new villages, 
TANU activists and officials  ignored   Nyerere's advice  against  compul- 
sion.  Thus,  when  he  decided  in   1970 that  the  entire   population   of 

250
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 233 


Dodoma (a drought-prone   region  in  central  Tanzania) should  be relo- 
cated to ujamaa  villages within   fourteen  months,  officials  sprang  into 
action.  Relying on  everyone's sharp memories  of  a regional  famine  in 
1969, the officials  let  it be understood  that  only  those dwelling  in  uja- 
maa villages would  ever receive famine  relief.  Those who already lived 
in ujamaa villages  with  fewer than the stipulated  minimum   of 250 fam- 
ilies were often  forced to amalgamate  with  another settlement  to reach 
the required  size. Communal plots  were built  into  the new settlements, 
as were, in theory, labor  regulations  and cropping   schedules. When an 
agricultural   officer  insisted  that  there  be no discussion  of  the official 
decision to  enlarge one village's  communal  field  to  170 acres, absorb- 
ing the adjacent private  plots,  he was thrown  out of the village  meeting 
in a  rare open  revolt.  An  M.P. who sided  with  the  village  was barred 
from  running  again and  placed under  surveillance,  while  the district's 
TANU chairman, who did likewise, was removed and placed under house 
arrest. Dodoma  was a preview  of what  was to come. 
     Lest there be any doubt  that villagization   meant central  control  and 
not simply  village  formation   and communal   farming,  the sorry  fate of 
the Ruvuma  Development   Association  (RDA) settled the matter.31 The 
RDA was an umbrella organization   representing  fifteen  communal  vil- 
lages scattered  over  one hundred  miles  in  the Songea,  a remote  and 
poor district   in  the southwestern  part  of the country.  Unlike  most  uja- 
maa villages, these were  the spontaneous creation  of young  local  mili- 
tants in  TANU. They began in 1960, long before Nyerere's  policy  decla- 
ration  of 1967, with  each village  inventing  its  own forms  of communal 
enterprise.  Early  on,  Nyerere  singled  out one  of the villages,  Litowa, 
heralding  it  as a place where he  could send people  to see rural  social- 
ism in  action.32 Its school, milling  cooperative,  and marketing   associa- 
tion  were the  envy of neighboring   villages.  Given the high  level of  pa- 
tronage  and financial   backing  the villagers  attracted,   it is  hard to  tell 
how  economically   sound  their  enterprises   were.  They did,  however, 
anticipate   Nyerere's declared  policy  of  local  control  and  nonauthori- 
tarian  cooperation.  The villagers were,  on the other hand,  independent 
and  assertive vis-a-vis  the  state. Having   won  over  many  of the  local 
party  officials  and having  pioneered  village  cooperation  on their  own, 
they were  not about  to let themselves simply  be absorbed into  bureau- 
cratic  party  routines.  When  each family  in  these villages was ordered 
to  grow  one acre  of fire-cured   tobacco,  a crop  they considered  to  be 
labor-intensive   and without  profit,  they openly  protested through  their 
organization.  In  1968, following  a high-level visit  by TANU'S central com- 
mittee,  the RDA was officially banned  as an illegal  organization,   its as- 
sets seized, and its  functions  assumed by the party  and burea~cracy.~~ 

251
234 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


Although  it put  into practice  Nyerere's espoused goals, its  refusal to fit 
into the  centralized  scheme of the party  was fatal. 


"To Live  in  Villages  Is  an Order" 

With his  order  of December  1973,34 Nyerere ended a period  of villag- 
ization  marked by sporadic  but unauthorized   coercion  and put  the en- 
tire machinery  of the state behind compulsory,  universal ~illagization.~~ 
Whatever restraining   influence  that  his public  disavowal  of  the use of 
force had  provided  was now nullified;   it  was replaced  by the desire of 
the party and bureaucracy   to produce the quick  results  he wanted. Vil- 
lagization  was, after  all, for  their  own benefit,  as Juma Mwapachu,  an 
official  in  charge of forced  settlement  in the  district  of  Shinyanga,  ex- 
plained.  "The 1974 Operation [Planned]  Villages was not  to be a matter 
of persuasion  but of  coercion.  As Nyerere argued,  the move  had to be 
compulsory  because Tanzania  could  not  sit back  seeing the  majority 
of its people  leading a  'life of death.'  The State,  had, therefore,  to take 
the role  of  the 'father'   in  ensuring  that  its  people chose  a better  and 
more  prosperous  life  for  them~elves."~~New villages   and communal 
farming  had been an official  policy  priority   at least since  1967, but the 
results  had been  a disappointment.   Now  it  was time  to  insist  on  vil- 
lage living,  Nyerere  claimed,  as the only way  to promote  development 
and increased  production.   The official  term  employed  after  1973 was 
"planned"  villages  (not  "ujamaa"  villages),  presumably   to distinguish 
them both  from  the communal-production     regime of  ujamaa villages, 
which  had failed, and  from the unplanned  settlements  and homesteads 
in which  Tanzanians now  resided. 
     The  actual campaign   was called  Operation  Planned Villages,  con- 
juring   in  the popular   mind  images  of  military   operations.   And  so it 
was. The operational  plan specified, by the  book, a six-phase sequence: 
"educate  [or "politicize"]    the people, search  for a suitable  site, inspect 
the location,  plan  the village  and demarcate  the land  clearly, train   the 
officials   in  the methodology   of  ujamaa,  and  re~ettlement."~'  The se- 
quence was both  inevitable  and involuntary.   Given the  "crash"  nature 
of the campaign,   educating the  people did  not mean  asking their  con- 
sent;  it meant  telling   them  that  they had  to  move and  why  it  was in 
their  best  interest.  The pace was,  moreover,  double-quick.   The dress 
rehearsal  in Dodoma  in 1970 had allowed  planning  teams one day per 
village  plan; the new  campaign stretched  the planning   apparatus even 
thinner. 
      Nor was the  speed of the operation  a mere  by-product  of  adminis- 
trative  haste. The planners  felt that  the shock of lightning-quick    settle- 

252
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 235 


ment would  have a salutary effect. It would  rip  the peasantry from their 
traditional   surroundings   and  networks  and would   put them  down  in 
entirely  new  settings  where,  it  was  hoped, they  could  then  be  more 
readily  remade  into  modern   producers  following   the  instructions   of 
experts.38 In a larger sense, of course, the purpose of forced  settlement 
is always  disorientation   and then  reorientation.   Colonial  schemes for 
state farms or private  plantations,  as well  as the many plans to create a 
class of progressive yeoman  farmers,  operated on the  assumption that 
revolutionizing   the living   arrangements  and working  environments   of 
people would  transform  them fundamentally.   Nyerere was fond of con- 
trasting  the loose, autonomous  work rhythms  of traditional   cultivators 
with  the tight-knit,   interdependent   discipline   of the factory.39 Densely 
settled villages with  cooperative  production  would  move the Tanzanian 
population  toward  that  ideal. 
     Rural  Tanzanians were  understandably  reluctant  to  move into  new 
communities  planned  by the  state. Their  past experience, whether  be- 
fore independence  or  after, warranted   their  skepticism.  As cultivators 
and  pastoralists,   they had  developed  patterns   of  settlement  and,  in 
many  cases, patterns  of  periodic   movements  that  were  finely  tuned 
adaptations  to  an  often  stingy  environment   which  they  knew  excep- 
tionally  well.  The state-mandated  movement  threatened to  destroy the 
logic  of  this  adaptation.   Administrative    convenience,  not  ecological 
considerations,   governed  the  selection   of  sites; they  were  often   far 
from  fuelwood  and water, and their  population   often exceeded the car- 
rying  capacity  of the land. As one specialist  foresaw:  "Unless villagiza- 
tion  can be coupled  with  infrastructural    inputs  to create a novel  tech- 
nology  to  master  the environment,    the nucleated  settlement   pattern 
may, by itself,  be counter-productive    in  economic  terms  and destruc- 
tive  of the ecological  balance  maintained   under the  traditional   settle- 
ment  pattern.  Nucleated  settlement will   mean over-crowding   . . . with 
people and domestic  animals  and the accompanying  soil erosion,  gully 
formation,   and  dust  bowls which   are  common  features  in situations 
where  the  human  initiative   has  suddenly  overtaxed  the carrying   ca- 
pacity  of the land.'I4O 
      Given the resistance of the population  and the bureaucratic-military 
imperative   of a crash  program,  violence  was inevitable.  Threats  were 
all  but universal.  Those slated to  move were again  told that  famine  re- 
lief  would be accorded  only to those who  moved peacefully. The militia 
and the  army were  mobilized  to provide  transport  and to compel  com- 
pliance.  People  were  told that  if  they  did  not pull  down  their   houses 
and  load them  into  the government  trucks,  the  authorities  would  pull 
down  the  houses. In  order   to prevent  those  forcibly   moved from   re- 

253
236 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


turning,  many  homes  were burned.  Typical   of the  reports  that  came 
out of Tanzania was the  following  description   by a student in  the poor 
region of  Kigoma:  "Force and  brutality  was  used. The police were  the 
ones empowered together  with  some  government  officials.  For exam- 
ple at Katanazuza  in  Kalinzi,   . . . the police  had to take  charge physi- 
cally. In  some areas where  peasants refused  to pack  their  belongings 
and board   the  Operation  lorries   and  trucks,   their   houses were  de- 
stroyed through  burning  or pulling  them  down. House destruction  was 
witnessed in Nyange  village. It  became a routine  order  of the day. And 
the peasants had unconditionally  to  shift. It  was a forceful villagization 
in some villages."41 When the peasantry  realized  that  open resistance 
was dangerous and  probably  futile,  they  saved what they  could, often 
fleeing the new  village at the  first  opportui~ity.~~ 
     Such incentives  as clinics, piped  water, and schools were  offered to 
those who went  peacefully. Sometimes  they did, although  they  tried to 
insist  on a written   contract  with  officials   and to  require  that the  new 
services promised  them be established  before they moved.  Positive in- 
ducements were, apparently,  more typical  of the early, voluntary  phase 
of villagization   than  the  later, compulsory   phase. A few  regions were 
little  affected;  officials   there  simply  designated  many  existing  settle- 
ments as planned  villages   and left  it  at that.  There  was both  an eco- 
nomic  and  political   logic  to  the  exclusions.  Wealthy, densely  settled 
areas such as West Lake and Kilimanjaro  were  largely spared for  three 
reasons: farmers  there  were already  living  in  populous  villages;  their 
undisturbed  productivity   in cash crops was vital  for state revenues and 
foreign  exchange;  and the  groups  residing  in  these areas were  over- 
represented among  the bureaucratic   elite. Some critics  suggested that 
the higher   the proportion    of  government  officials   from  an  area, the 
later  (and more desultory)  its  ~illagization.~~ 
     When  Nyerere  learned exactly  how  thin  was the fiction   of persua- 
sion  and how  widespread  were  the  brutalities,   he expressed  his dis- 
may. He decried the failure  to  compensate peasants for their  destroyed 
huts  and allowed  that  some officials  had  moved people  to unsuitable 
locations  that  lacked water   or sufficient   arable land.  "Despite  our  of- 
ficial  policies  and  despite all  our  democratic   institutions,   some lead- 
ers do not  listen to the  people," he admitted.  "They  find it  much easier 
to tell  people  what  to            But  it was  "absurd  to pretend   that these 
cases were typical  of                                letvillagizati~n,"~~ alone to call off the campaign. 
Nyerere  wanted   local  authorities   to  be knowledgeable,   close  to the 
people,  and persuasive  in putting   across state policy;   he did not,  any 
more  than Lenin  did,  want  them to  obey the people's wishes. Not  sur- 
prisingly,  the sources agree that virtually   all village meetings  were one- 

254
                                                                          Villagization in Tanzania 237 


way affairs   of lectures,   explanations,   instructions,   scoldings,  prom- 
ises, and warnings.  The assembled villagers  were expected  to be what 
Sally  Falk Moore  has  appropriately   called   "ratifying   bodies  public," 
giving  populist   legitimacy   to  decisions  made  el~ewhere.~6 Far from 
achieving  this populist   legitimacy,  the villagization   campaign  created 
only  an alienated,   skeptical,   demoralized,   and  uncooperative   peas- 
antry for  which  Tanzania would  pay a huge price,  both financially   and 
p~litically.~~ 


A Streamlined People and Their Crops 

     The planned new  villages followed  both a bureaucratic  logic  and an 
aesthetic logic. Nyerere  and his planners had a visual idea  of just how a 
modern village  should look.  Such visual ideas become powerful  tropes. 
Take the word "streamline,"  for  example. "Streamlining"    has become a 
powerful   image  for   modern  forms,   conveying   economy,  sleekness, 
efficiency,  and minimal   friction   or  resistance. Politicians   and  admin- 
istrators  hasten to  cash in on the  symbolic  capital  behind  the term  by 
declaring  that they  will  streamline  this  agency or that  corporation,   al- 
lowing  the  audience's visual  imagination   to fill   in the  details  of a bu- 
reaucratic  equivalent  of a sleek locomotive  or jet. Thus it  is that a term 
that  has a  specific,  contextual   meaning  in  one field   (aerodynamics) 
comes to be generalized  to  subjects where  its meaning  is more  visual 
and aesthetic than  scientific.  Above all, as we shall see, the aesthetic of 
the new  village  was a negation  of  the past.  First,  however,  to the  ad- 
ministrative   logic. 
     What greeted  Nyerere when he visited  new villages in  the district  of 
Shinyanga  (northwest  Tanzania) in early  1975 was fairly  typical  of bu- 
reaucratic  haste and  insen~ibility.~~Some  of the villages were  laid  out 
as "one long  street of houses stretching   for  miles like  the wagons  of a 
                           Itloc~motive."~~ appeared to Nyerere that this was a crude case of sim- 
ply "dumping"   the settlers.  But such  linear  villages did  have a curious 
logic behind  them. Administrators   had a penchant for  locating  new vil- 
lages along the  major  roads, where  they could  be most easily reached 
and monit~red.~~Roadside   siting  rarely  made economic  sense; it did, 
on the  other  hand, demonstrate   how the  goal of  extending  the state's 
control  over the  peasantry often  trumped  the state's other goal  of rais- 
ing  agricultural   production.    As Stalin  had  learned,  a captured  peas- 
antry  was not necessarily  a productive  peasantry. 
     The visual  aesthetics of how  a proper new  village should  look  com- 
bined  elements  of  administrative    regularity,    tidiness,  and  legibility 
linked  to an overall  Cartesian  order. This  was the modern  administra- 

255
238 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


tive  village,  and  it  was  implicitly     associated  with  a  modern,   disci- 
plined,  and productive  peasantry.  One astute observer, sympathetic  to 
the aims of villagization,   noted  the overall  effect. "The new  approach," 
he explained,  "was  more in  line  with  bureaucratic   thinking   and with 
what a bureaucracy  can do effectively:  enforced movement of the  peas- 
ants into new 'modern'  settlements, i.e., settlements  with houses placed 
close together,  in  straight  lines,  along  the  roads,  and with   the fields 
outside the nucleated village,  organized in  block farms, each block con- 
taining  the villager's   individual   plots,  but  with  only  one type of  crop, 
and readily  accessible for  control  by the  agricultural   extension officer 
and eventual cultivation   by government   tractor^."^' 
     As the exercise of village  creation  was repeated,  the administrative 
image of  the  modern  village  became  increasingly   codified,  a  known 
protocol  that   almost  any bureaucrat   could  reproduce.   "The  first  re- 
sponse of the West Lake leaders, when they were  called upon to  imple- 
ment ujamaa in  the Region, was to think  of resettlement.  Creating  new 
settlements had several advantages. They were  highly  visible, and easy 
to organize  right  from  the  beginning  in  the orderly,  nice  looking  way 
preferred   by  bureaucrats   with   the  houses  and   shambas  [gardens, 
farms]  in straight  lines,  et~.''~~ Reconstructing the historical  lineage  of 
this composite   picture  of  modern  rural   life would   be fascinating,   al- 
though tangential   to our  purposes. No  doubt it  owes something  to co- 
lonial  policy and hence to the  look of the modern  European  rural  land- 
scape, and  we also  know  that  Nyerere  was  impressed  with  what  he 
saw on his trips  to  the Soviet Union  and  to China.  What is significant, 
however,  is that  the  modern  planned  village   in Tanzania  was  essen- 
tially  a  point-by-point   negation   of  existing  rural   practice,  which   in- 
cluded  shifting  cultivation   and pastoralism;   polycropping;   living  well 
off the main  roads; kinship   and lineage authority;   small,  scattered set- 
tlements with  houses built  higgledy-piggledy;   and production  that  was 
dispersed  and opaque to  the  state. The logic  of  this negation  seemed 
often to prevail   over sound ecological  or  economic considerations. 


Communal Farming and Intensive Production 

     Collecting   Tanzanians into  villages  was  seen from the  very begin- 
ning  as a necessary step in establishing  completely  new forms  of agri- 
cultural  production   in  which  the state would  play  the major  role.  The 
first  five-year plan  was explicit. 

     Although the improvement approach [as opposed to the transformation 
     approach] can contribute  to increasing  production  in  . . . zones [with 
     low and irregular  rainfall],  it  cannot in all  events give rise to very sub- 

256
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 239 


     stantial  results because of  the dispersal  of  the farm  producers,  the 
     impoverishment  of the soils by the practice  of bush burning  and con- 
     siderable difficulties in  marketing products. The policy which  Govern- 
     ment has decided to pursue with respect to  all these zones consists in 
     re-grouping and re-settling farmers on the most favorable soil, installing 
     there a system of private or  collective ownership  and introducing  su- 
    pervised crop rotation and mixed farming that would permit the mainte- 
     nance of soil fertility.53 

The population   concentrated   in  planned  villages  would,  by  degrees, 
grow  cash crops (as specified  by the agricultural    experts) on  commu- 
nal fields with   state-supplied machinery.  Their  housing,  their  local ad- 
ministration,   their   agricultural   practices,   and, most  important,   their 
workdays  would be overseen by  state authorities. 
     The forced villagization   campaign  itself had such a disastrous  effect 
on agricultural    production   that  the  state was in  no  position  to  press 
ahead immediately   with  full-scale  communal   farming.   Huge imports 
of food  were  necessary from   1973 through   1975.54 Nyerere declared 
that the  1.2 billion  shillings  spent  for food  imports  would  have bought 
one cow for  every Tanzanian family. Roughly  60 percent of  the new vil- 
lages were located  on semiarid  land unsuitable  for  permanent  cultiva- 
tion,  requiring   peasants to  walk  long  distances to  reach viable  plots. 
The chaos of the move itself  and the slow  process of adapting  to a new 
ecological  setting meant  further  disruptions   of prod~ction.~~ 
     Until   1975, the  state's effort  to control   production   outside its  own 
state schemes took the classic colonial  form:  laws mandating  that  each 
household  grow certain  crops  on a minimum   number  of acres. A vari- 
ety of fines  and penalties were  deployed to  enforce these measures. In 
one region,  officials  announced  that no  one would  be allowed  to go to 
market  or ride  a bus unless he could  prove that  he was cultivating   the 
required  seven and one-half  acres of land.  In  another  case, famine re- 
lief was withheld   until  each villager  had planted  one acre of cassava in 
accordance  with  the minimum   acreage law.56 One major source of the 
conflict  leading  to  the dissolution  of  the Ruvuma  ujamaa villages  was 
the forced cultivation   of fire-cured  tobacco at what  the villagers  took to 
be confiscatory  prices.  As the  colonizers  had understood  long  before, 
forced  cultivation   of this kind  could  be successfully imposed  only on a 
peasantry  that  was physically   concentrated   and therefore   able to  be 
monitored   and, if necessary, dis~iplined.~' 
     The next  step was regulated,  communal                                  Thisproducti~n.~~ form of 
cultivation    was anticipated   in  the  Villages  and  Ujamaa  Villages  Act 
(1975),  which  established  "village  collective   farms"  and  required  vil- 
lage authorities   to draw up  annual work  plans  and production  targets. 

257
240 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


In practice,   the size  of each communal   field  and  its production   plan 
were typically   set  by an  agricultural    field  officer  (who  was  eager to 
please his superiors)  and the village  chief,  with  little  or  no wider  con- 
                          The~ultation.~~ result was a labor plan that bore no relation to the sea- 
sonal supply  of local labor,  let alone  the peasants' own goals. Work  on 
the collective  village farm  was experienced  as little  different  from  cor- 
vee labor. Villagers had no choice in the matter,  and it was rare for their 
work  to yield  a profit.  Even  though extension  agents were  directed  to 
devote their  efforts  exclusively to the  communal  fields, the  crops were 
often unsuitable,  the soil  infertile,  the  seed and fertilizer  late to  arrive, 
and the promised  tractor  with  plow  nowhere in  sight. These shortcom- 
ings, plus the provision  that any profit  (a very rare event) from  the com- 
munal  field  could  be  counted  as revenue  for  the  village  committee, 
meant that  the work  was deeply resented. 
     In  theory,  the system  of political   and  labor  control   was thorough 
and inescapable.  Villages were  divided  into  sections (mitaa)  and each 
section into  several  cells  (mashina,  made up  of ten  households).  The 
residential  order  was replicated  on the communal   fields. Each section 
was responsible for  the cultivation   of a segment of the communal field, 
and within   that  segment, each cell  was responsible  for  a correspond- 
ing fragment.  Again in  theory, the cell  leader was responsible for  labor 
mobilization   and s~rveillance.~~ Structurally,  then,  the parallels  in the 
residential  and  labor-disciplinary    hierarchies  were  designed to  make 
them perfectly  transparent   and legible to  the authorities. 
     In  practice,   the  system  broke   down  quickly.   The areas  actually 
under communal  cultivation   were typically  far  smaller than  the figures 
officially  reported.61 Most section  and village  authorities  were  content 
to go through  the motions  when it  came to communal  cultivation.   And 
they were  reluctant  to impose  fines on their   neighbors who  neglected 
the labor  rules in  order to  tend to their  all-important    private plots. 
     As a  response to  such  pervasive  foot-dragging,   many  communal 
fields were  divided  up, and  each household was  made responsible  for 
cultivating,   say, half  an acre.62 It was  no longer  necessary to  coordi- 
nate labor  for  working   a single  large  field,  and the  responsibility   for 
cultivation,   and  hence sanctions,  could  now  be pinpointed.   The new 
system resembled the  colonial  forced  cultivation  system, with  one dif- 
ference: the plots  were physically   consolidated  for  easier supervision. 
Still,  the absence of any appreciable  return  from  this  labor meant  that 
each household focused on  its private  holding  and treated the commu- 
nal  plot  as  an  onerous  residual   activity,   despite  occasional  official 
warnings  that the priorities   should be inverted.63 The disparity in yields 
naturally  reflected  the disparity   in attention. 

258
                                                                          Villagization in Tanzania 24 1 


     The  aim  of Tanzanian  rural   policy   from   1967 through   the  early 
1980s was to reconfigure  the  rural  population   into  a form  that  would 
allow the state to impose its development  agenda and, in the process, to 
control  the work  and production   of  cultivators.  Nowhere   is this more 
explicit  than  in  the document  for  the  third  five-year  plan  (1978):  "In 
the rural  sector, the Party  has had great success in resettling   the rural 
peasantry in villages  where it is now possible  to identify  able-bodied in- 
dividuals  able  to work  and  also to  identify   the  acreage available   for 
agricultural   purposes. . . . The plan  intends  to make sure that  in  every 
workplace,  rural   or urban,  our  implementing   organs set specific work 
targets each year. . . . The village government will  see to it that  all Party 
policies  in  respect of development   programmes  are  adhered           In 
case the purpose of  visibility   and control   was doubted,  the plan  went 
on to  explain   that  agricultural    development   "in  our   present  condi- 
tions"  calls for  "setting  up work  timetables   and production   targets."65 
Communal  farms  (now  called  village  government   farms)  were  man- 
dated. But  as Henry Bernstein  notes, with  the incomplete   collectiviza- 
tion  of  land  and  the  unwillingness   to  resort   to truly   draconian   en- 
forcement  measures, these communal  farms  were bound  to founder.66 
     The underlying   premise of Nyerere's  agrarian  policy, for  all  its rhe- 
torical  flourishes  in  the direction   of traditional    culture,  was  little  dif- 
ferent from  that  of colonial  agrarian  policy.  That premise  was that  the 
practices  of  African  cultivators   and  pastoralists  were  backward,   un- 
scientific,  inefficient,   and ecologically  irresponsible.   Only close super- 
vision,  training,   and,  if  need be,  coercion  by  specialists  in  scientific 
agriculture   could bring  them and their  practices  in line  with  a modern 
Tanzania.  They were  the  problem   to which   the  agricultural    experts 
were the solution. 
     It  was precisely  the assumption,  to quote a Tanzanian civil  servant, 
of a "traditional    outlook  and  unwillingness   to change"67 that required 
the entire series of agricultural   schemes, from ujamaa villages to forced 
relocation   to the supervised  cultivation   launched  by  the colonial   and 
the  independent  regimes.  This  view  of  the  peasantry  permeates  the 
1964 World  Bank  report  and  the first  Tanganyikan  five-year  plan.  Al- 
though  the  plan  notes that  "significant   inroads  have  been made  into 
the  conservatism  of the  rural   population,   who  as they become  orga- 
nized into  co-operatives,  respond                                  itenco~ragingly,"~~ argues that more 
extensive measures are  called for.  Thus the  1964 plan declares:  "How 
to  overcome the  destructive  conservatism  of the people, and  generate 
the drastic  agrarian  reforms  which  must be effected if the  country is to 
survive  is  one of  the  most difficult    problems  the  political   leaders  of 
Tanzania have to face."69 

259
242 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


     Nyerere  entirely  agreed with  the majority  of the  extension officials, 
who believed that  their job  was to "overcome [the  farmers']  apathy and 
attachment  to outmoded  practice^."^^ He and the World  Bank saw eye- 
to-eye in having the first  plan provide  for  sixty new settlement  schemes 
in which  farmers  who  followed  the rules  would  receive land.  There  is 
no mistaking  this  picture  of a willfully    ignorant  and less than  diligent 
class of  cultivators   in  Nyerere's first   broadcast  as prime   minister  in 
196 1 : "If you have cotton unpicked  on your  shamba, if  you have culti- 
vated half  an acre  less than you  could  cultivate,  if  you are  letting  the 
soil run  needlessly off  your  land, or  if your  shamba  is full  of weeds, if 
you deliberately   ignore   the advice  given  you  by the  agricultural    ex- 
perts, then you  are a traitor  in  the battle.'I7l 
     The  logical  counterpart   to  the  lack  of faith  of  the  ordinary   culti- 
vator was the hyperfaith   of the agricultural   experts and the "blind  faith 
in machines  and  large scale  operation^."^^ Just as the planned  village 
was a vast "improvement"  in  legibility  and control  over past settlement 
practices, the  planned agriculture   offered by the experts was, in  its leg- 
ibility  and  order, an "improvement"   on the  infinite  variety  and muddle 
of smallholdings   and  their  existing   technique^.^^ In the  new villages, 
the settlers' private  plots  (shambas) were generally mapped  out by sur- 
veyors and were trim,   square or rectangular  plots  of equal size, placed 
side by  side  in  straight   rows  (figure   31). Their   design  followed   the 
same logic as the segmented communal  plots:  a logic of clarity  and  ad- 
ministrative   ease rather  than  agronomic   sense. Thus when a scheme 
for  tea cultivation  was begun,  the smallholders  were  required  to plant 
their  tea in a single  block  "because it was easier for  the extension staff 
to work  on tea that  was planted  in the same ~1ace.j'~~ 
     The  order  of  the  fields  was  replicated  in  the  order   of the  plants 
within   the fields.  Tanzanian farmers  often  planted  two  or more  crops 
together  in the  same field  (a technique variously   called polycropping, 
intercropping,   or  relay cropping).   In  the coffee-growing  areas, for  ex- 
ample,  coffee was  often interplanted   with   bananas, beans, and  other 
annuals.  For  most  agronomists,  this  practice  was  anathema.  As one 
dissenting  specialist explained,  "The agricultural   extension service  has 
been encouraging   farmers  to plant  pure-stand coffee  and considering 
this practice  the sine qua non of modern farming."75If  the crop were ba- 
nanas, the banana  trees must also be in  pure stands. Agricultural    field 
officers judged their  accomplishments by whether  each crop under their 
supervision  was planted  in straight,  properly  spaced rows and  was not 
mixed  with  any other Like~ultigen.~~  large-scale mechanized  farming, 
monocropping   had a scientific  rationale   in particular   contexts, but ex- 
tension officers  often promoted  monocropping  uncritically   as an article 

260
                                                                          Villagization in Tanzania 243 











                                       [To view this image, refer to  
                                       the print version of this title.] 
                                        
                                        
                                        











                            3 1. Plan for a ujamaa village: Makazi 
                           Mapya, Omulunazi, Rushwa, Tanzania 

of faith in  the catechism  of modem  farming.  While  empirical   evidence 
was even then mounting  in  favor  of the ecological  soundness and pro- 
ductivity  of some intercropping   regimes, the faith  continued  unabated. 
What is clear, however, is that monocropping and row  planting  vastly fa- 
cilitate the work  of administrators  and agronomists.  Both techniques fa- 
cilitate  inspection  and  calculations  of  acreage and  yield;  they  greatly 
simplify  field trials by minimizing   the number  of variables at play in  any 
one field; they streamline the job of extension recommendations   and the 
supervision  of cultivation;   and, finally, they  simplify  control  of the  har- 
vest. The simplified   and  legible  field  crop  offers  to  state agricultural 
officers  many of  the  same advantages that  the  "stripped-down"   com- 
mercial  forest offered to scientific  foresters and revenue officers. 


Bureaucratic Convenience, Bureaucratic Interests 

     Authoritarian    social  engineering  is apt  to display  the  full  range of 
standard bureaucratic   pathologies. The transformations   it wishes to ef- 
fect cannot  generally be brought  about without   applying  force or  with- 
out treating   nature  and human  subjects as if  they were  functions  in  a 
few administrative  routines.  Far from being regrettable anomalies,  these 

261
244 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


behavioral  by-products  are  inherent  in  high-modernist   campaigns  of 
this kind.  I am purposely  ignoring  here the more obvious  inhumanities 
that  are inevitable   whenever  great  power   is placed  in  the  hands  of 
largely  unaccountable  state authorities   who  are under  pressure from 
above to produce  results  despite  popular  resistance.  Instead,  I stress 
two key elements  of the bureaucratic   response typified   by the ujamaa 
village campaign:  first,  the civil  servants'  inclination   to reinterpret   the 
campaign  so that  it called  for  results  that  they could  more  easily  de- 
liver, and second,  their  disposition  to reinterpret   the campaign  in  line 
with  what was in  their  corporate  interests. 
     The first  tendency  was most  readily  apparent  in  the displacement 
of  goals toward   strictly   quantitative    criteria   of  performance.   What 
might  be called  a  "substantive  ujamaa  village,"  whose  residents  had 
freely consented  to move, had  agreed on how  to manage a communal 
plot,  and were  productive   farmers  managing   their  own  local  affairs 
(Nyerere's initial   vision),  was replaced  by a "notional  ujamaa  village," 
an  integer  that  could   be added  to  an  avalanche   of statistics.   Thus 
party cadres and civil  servants, in  showing how  much they had accom- 
plished,  emphasized the  numbers  of people  moved, new  villages  cre- 
ated, house  lots  and communal   fields  surveyed,  wells  drilled,    areas 
cleared and plowed,  tons of fertilizer   delivered,  and TANU branches set 
up. No matter  if  a given ujamaa village  was not much  more than  a few 
truckloads  of  angry peasants  and their  belongings,  unceremoniously 
dumped  at  a  site  marked   off  with   a  few  surveyors'   stakes;  it  still 
counted  as one  ujamaa  village  to  the officials'   credit.   In  addition,   a 
pettifogging   aesthetics  might   prevail   over  substance.  The desire  to 
have all  the houses in  a planned  village  perfectly  aligned,  which   was 
presumably  linked   to easy surveying  and  the desire  to  please the in- 
specting officials,  might  require  that a house be dismantled  in  order to 
move it  a scant fifty  feet to the  surveyor's line.77 
     The "productivity   of  the political   apparatus" was judged  by numer- 
ical  results that  permitted  aggregation   and, perhaps more  important, 
corn par is on^.^^ And when officials realized that their futures  depended 
on producing   impressive figures  quickly,  a process of competitive  em- 
ulation   was unleashed.   One  official   described  the  atmosphere  that 
caused him to  abandon an  initial  strategy  of selective implementation 
and to plunge  ahead. 

     This [strategy] was found to be unworkable, for two main reasons. First, 
     there was a competitive attitude (particularly between regions) with all 
     its ~olitical  overtones. Here was a moment for self-aggrandizement by 
     proving ability  to mobilize a rural  population wholesale. Reports were 
     coming in from Mara Region that they were about to complete their op- 

262
                                                                          Villagization in Tanzania 245 


    eration  when we had not started at all. Top party officials were herald- 
     ing and positively reinforcing the achievements of resettlement in Geita 
     District. Who, in such circumstances, would have wished to lag behind? 
     Political leaders therefore called for quick measures to complete the re- 
    settlement exercise in a short time. Such a rushed exercise caused prob- 
     lems, of course, in the form of poorly planned villages.79 

     Nyerere,  necessarily perceiving   the campaign  largely  through  sets 
of statistics   and self-congratulatory    official   reports,  exacerbated  the 
competitive  atmosphere.  His glowing  report  to TANU was a delirium of 
numbers, targets,  and  percentage^.^^ 

     Consider, for example, the question of villagization. In my report to the 
     1973 TANU Conference I was able to say that 2,028,164 people were liv- 
     ing in villages. Two years later, in June 1975,I reported to the next TANU 
     Conference that approximately 9,100,000 people were living in village 
     communities. Now there are about 13,065,000 people living together in 
     7,684 villages. This is a tremendous achievement. It is an achievement 
     of TANU and Government leaders in cooperation with the people of Tan- 
     zania. It  means that  something  like 70%  of our  people have moved 
     their homes in the space of about three years8' 

     The  second, and  surely   most  ominous,  deflection   of  the  ujamaa 
campaign  brought   off by  state  authorities   was to  see that  its  imple- 
mentation  systematically  served to underwrite   their  status and  power. 
As Andrew  Coulson  has perceptively   noted,  in  the  actual  process of 
creating  new  villages,  the  administrators    and  party  officials   (them- 
selves competitors)   effectively   evaded  all  those  policies  that   would 
have diminished   their  privileges  and power  while  exaggerating  those 
that reinforced  their  corporate  sway. Thus such ideas as allowing small 
ujamaa  villages  like  Ruvuma  to operate  free of  government  interfer- 
ence (before 1968),  pupils'  involvement  in  decision making  in  schools 
(1 969), workers'   participation    in   management   (1 969- 70), and  the 
power to elect village  councils  and leadership  (1973-75)   were all  hon- 
ored in  the  breach.82 High-modernist   social  engineering   is ideal  soil 
for  authoritarian    pretensions,   and  Tanzanian  officialdom   made  the 
most of this  chance to consolidate  its position.83 


The Idea of a "National Plantation" 

     Villagization   was  meant  to radically   concentrate  Tanzania's  peas- 
antry  in order  to regiment  it politically   and  economically.  If it  worked, 
it would  transform  the dispersed, autonomous, and illegible populations 
that had  thus far  eluded most of the  state policies  they found  onerous. 
The planners  pictured,   instead,  a  population   settled  in  government- 

263
246 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


designed villages under  tight  administrative   control,  planting  commu- 
nal  fields in  which   pure-stand  crops  were  grown   according  to  state 
specifications.  If  we  allow  for  the  continued  existence  of substantial 
private  plots  and  the (related)   weakness of  labor  control,   the  whole 
scheme came perilously  close to looking  like  a vast, albeit noncontigu- 
ous, state plantation.   What  a neutral   observer might   have taken  as a 
new form  of servitude,  however benevolent,  was largely  unquestioned 
by the elites, for the  policy sailed  under the banner  of "development." 
     It  seems incredible, in  retrospect,  that any state could  proceed with 
so much hubris  and  so little  information    and planning   to the disloca- 
tion of  so many million   lives. It  seems, again in  retrospect,  a wild  and 
irrational   scheme which  was bound  to fail  both the  expectations of  its 
planners  and the material  and  social needs of its hapless victims. 
     The inhumanities    of  compulsory  villagization    were  magnified   by 
the deeply  ingrained   authoritarian    habits of  the bureaucracy   and by 
the pell-mell  rush of the campaign.  To concentrate on such administra- 
tive and  political  shortcomings,   however,  is to miss  the point.  Even if 
the campaign  had been granted more  time,  more technical  skill,  and a 
better "bedside manner," the party-state  could  not possibly have assem- 
bled and digested  the information   necessary to  make a fundamentally 
schematic  plan  succeed. The existing  economic  activity   and physical 
movement of the Tanzanian rural  population   were the consequences of 
a mind-bogglingly   complex,  delicate,  and pliable  set of adaptations  to 
their  diverse  social and  material                                 Asenvir~nment.~~in the customary 
land-tenure  arrangements   examined  in  chapter   1, these adaptations 
defy  administra~tive codification    because of  their  endless  local  vari- 
ability,  their  elaboration,  and  their  plasticity  in  the face of new  condi- 
tions.  If land  tenure  defies codification,    then, it  stands to  reason that 
the connections  structuring   the  entire  material  and social  life  of each 
particular   group of peasants would  remain  largely  opaque to both spe- 
cialists and  administrators. 
     Under the  circumstances, wholesale, by-the-book resettlement  made 
a havoc of peasant lives. Only a few of the  most obvious ecological  fail- 
ures of  villagization   will   serve to  illustrate   the pattern   of ignorance. 
Peasants were forcibly   moved from   annually  flooded  lands that  were 
vital to  their cropping   regime and shifted  to poor  soils on high ground. 
They were, as we have seen, moved to all-weather  roads where the  soil 
was unfamiliar    or  unsuitable  for  the  crops  envisaged.  Village  living 
placed cultivators   far from  their  fields, thus  thwarting  the  crop watch- 
ing  and pest control   that more  dispersed  homesteads  made possible. 
The concentration   of  livestock  and people  often  had  the unfortunate 
consequence of encouraging  cholera  and  livestock  epidemics.  For the 

264
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 247 


highly  mobile  Maasai  and  other  pastoralists,  the  scheme of  creating 
ujamaa ranches  by herding   cattle  to a single  location  was  an unmiti- 
gated disaster for  range conservation  and  pastoral  liveliho~ds.~~ 
     The failure   of ujamaa  villages was  almost guaranteed  by  the high- 
modernist  hubris   of planners   and specialists  who  believed  that  they 
alone knew how  to organize  a more satisfactory,  rational,  and produc- 
tive life  for  their  citizens.  It  should be noted  that  they did  have some- 
thing  to contribute   to  what  could  have been a more  fruitful    develop- 
ment of the Tanzanian  countryside.  But their  insistence that  they had a 
monopoly  on  useful knowledge   and that  they impose  this  knowledge 
set the stage for disaster. 
     Settling    people  into   supervised   villages   was   emphatically    not 
uniquely   the brainchild    of the  nationalist   elites  of  independent  Tan- 
zania. Villagization    had a  long colonial   history  in  Tanzania and  else- 
where,  as program  after program  was devised to  concentrate  the pop- 
ulation.  The same techno-economic   vision  was shared,  until  very late 
in  the  game, by  the World   Bank,  United  States  Agency  for  Interna- 
tional  Development   (USAID), and other development  agencies  contri- 
buting  to Tanzanian devel~pment.~~However  enthusiastic  they were in 
spearheading  their   campaign,  the political    leaders of  Tanzania were 
more  consumers  of  a high-modernist    faith  that  had  originated   else- 
where much  earlier  than  they were producers. 
     What  was perhaps  distinctive   about the Tanzanian  scheme was its 
speed, its comprehensiveness,  and its  intention  to  deliver  such collec- 
tive  services as schools,  clinics,  and  clean water.  Although   consider- 
able force was applied  in seeing the scheme through,  even then its con- 
sequences were not nearly  as brutal  or irremediable   as those of Soviet 
collectivization.87  The Tanzanian  state's relative weakness  and unwill- 
ingness to  resort to  Stalinist  methodssS as well as the Tanzanian peas- 
ants'  tactical  advantages,  including   flight,   unofficial   production   and 
trade,  smuggling, and  foot-dragging,  combined  to make the practice  of 
villagization   far  less destructive than  the theoqS9 


The  "Ideal"   State  Village:  Ethiopian    Variation 

The pattern  of  compulsory  villagization   in  Ethiopia  uncannily   resem- 
bles that  of Russia in its coerciveness  and Tanzania in its ostensible  ra- 
tionale.  Beyond  the obvious  shared  socialist terrain   and official   visits 
by Ethiopian    officials  to Tanzania  to observe  its program   in  action,90 
there  seems to be  a deeper  affinity  at  work  between  the  assertion  of 
state authority  in  the countryside,  on one hand, and the results in terms 
of  process and  actual  physical  plans,  on the  other.  The continuity   of 

265
248 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


Nyerere's plans with those of the  colonizers is obvious in  the Tanzanian 
case. In  Ethiopia,   which   was  never  colonized,  resettlement   can  be 
seen as a century-old project  of the imperial   dynasty to subjugate non- 
Amharic-speaking   peoples  and,   more  generally,   to  bring   fractious 
provinces under  central  control. 
     Although  the Marxist  revolutionary   elite  that  seized power in  early 
1974 resorted  to  forced settlement   at an early  stage, its  leader, Lieu- 
tenant Colonel  Mengistu Haile  Mariam  and  the Dergue-the    shadowy 
ruling  body of the revolutionary   regime-did      not call for  full-scale  vil- 
lagization  until  1985. The policy  anticipated  the eventual  resettlement 
of all 33 million  rural  Ethiopians.  Echoing  Nyerere, Mengistu  declared, 
"The scattered  and haphazard  habitation   and  livelihood  of  Ethiopian 
peasants cannot  build  socialism.   . . . Insofar   as efforts  are dispersed 
and livelihood   is individual,    the results  are only  hand-to-mouth   exis- 
tence amounting  to fruitless struggle  and drudgery, which  cannot build 
a prosperous  society."91 The other explanations  for  village  settlement 
were no  different  from  those  given in Tanzania:  concentration   would 
bring  services  to scattered  populations,   permit   state-designed social 
production  (producer  cooperatives),  and allow  mechanization  and po- 
litical  education.92 
     Socialism   and its  precondition,   villagization,    were virtually   Men- 
gistu's way  of saying  "modern."   In his  justification   for  massive reset- 
tlement, he decried  Ethiopia's reputation   as "a symbol of backwardness 
and a valley  of ignorance."  He  called on  Ethiopians  to  "rally  together 
to free farming   from  the ugly forces  of nature."  Finally, he condemned 
pastoralism  per  se, praising villagization    as a way "to rehabilitate   our 
nomad  society."93 
     The pace of resettlement,  however, was far more  brutal  in Ethiopia, 
inadvertently   helping  to lay the  groundwork   for the subsequent rebel- 
lions  that brought  down  the regime.  By March   1986, a scant year into 
the operation,   the regime  claimed  that  4.6 million   peasants had been 
settled  in  4,500 villages.94 Only  three  months  were  allotted  between 
the first  "agitation   and propaganda"  (read,  "command")  and the move 
itself-often      over  huge distances.  All  accounts  suggest that  many  of 
the new settlements  received almost  nothing in  the way of services and 
had more  of the aspect of  a penal colony  than of a functioning   village. 
      Forced villagization   in  the Arsi  region  was apparently  planned  di- 
rectly  from  the center  in Addis Ababa, with   little  or no local  participa- 
tion.  There  was a strict  template  which   local surveyors  and  adminis- 
trators   were  ordered  to  follow.  The plan  was  carefully  replicated   in 
each location,   inasmuch  as this was  not a regime  inclined  to  tolerate 
local  improvisation.   "But  the local  recruits  learned  their jobs  well, for 

266
                                                                    Villagization in Tanzania 249 

the villages  and their  1,000 [square]  meter compounds, carefully 
marked by pegs and sod cuts, have followed the geometric grid pat- 
tern required by the guidelines. In fact, some villages have been too 
rigidly laid out; for  example, one farmer had to move his large, well- 
constructed tukul [traditional thatched house] some 20 feet so that it 
would be 'in line' with all the other buildings in its 
    The close alignment between theory and practice can be seen by 
comparing the layout of a government plan for an ideal village with 
an aerial photograph of a new village (figures 32 and 33). Notice the 
central location  of all  key government functions.  A standardizing, 
round-number, bureaucratic mentality is obvious from the  fact that 
each village was expected to have one thousand inhabitants and each 
compound one thousand square meters.96 If every village had the same 
population and the same land allotment, a single model could simply 
be applied everywhere; no local knowledge would be required. The 
identical disposition of  land in  each settlement would make it that 
much easier for the authorities to send out general directives, to mon- 
itor crop production, and to control the harvest through the new Agri- 
cultural Marketing Corporation (AMC). The generic plan was particu- 
larly convenient for the hard-pressed surveyors, precisely because it 
bore no relation whatever to local ecological, economic, or social pat- 
terns. In order to facilitate the uniform design of the cookie-cutter vil- 
lages, the planning officials were directed to choose flat, cleared sites 
and to insist on straight roads and similar, numbered houses.97 
     The objects of this exercise in geometry were under no illusions 
about its purpose. When they were finally free to talk, refugees in So- 
malia told their interviewers that the new settlement pattern was de- 
vised to control  dissidence and  rebellion,  to prevent  people from 
leaving, to "make it easier to watch the people," to control the crops, to 
register possessions and livestock, and (in Wollega) to "allow them to 
take our boys to war more easily."98 
     In "model producer cooperatives," standardized housing was pro- 
vided: square, tin-roofed houses (chika bets). Elsewhere, traditional 
housing (tukuls) were disassembled and reconstructed in the rigidly 
stipulated order. As in Russia, all the private shops, tea houses, and 
small trading establishments were abolished, leaving only such state 
spaces as the village's mass organization and peasant association of- 
fices, literacy shed, health clinic, or state cooperative shop as public 
gathering places. In contrast to the Tanzanian experience, the Ethiopian 
campaign had a much stronger military component, as peasants were 
moved great distances with a view to military pacification and political 
emas~ulation.~~Needless  to say, the draconian conditions of Ethiopian 

267
250  RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 














                                             [To view this image, refer to  
                                             the print version of this title.] 
                                              
                                              
                                              














32.  A government plan for  a standard socialist village, Arsi region,  Ethiopia. The 
layout shows 1, a mass organization office; 2, a kindergarten; 3, a health clinic;  4, 
a state cooperative shop; 5, peasant association office; 6, reserve plots; 7, a pri- 
mary school; 8, a sports field; 9, a seed-multiplication  center; 10, a handicrafts 
center; and 11, an animal-breeding  station. Detail 12 depicts an enlargement of 
compound  sites, and detail 13 is an enlargement of two sites, showing the neigh- 
borhood  latrine at 14. 


villagization      meant   that  it  was   even  more   destructive    of  peasant   live- 
lihoods   and  of  the environment     than  its  Tanzanian   counterpart.100 
      A  full  appreciation     of  the  toll   of forced   resettlement     in  Ethiopia    ex- 
tends   far  beyond  the  standard    reports   of  starvation,    executions,    defor- 
estation,    and   failed   crops.   The   new  settlements     nearly   always   failed 
their   inhabitants     as human    communities     and  as units   of  food  produc- 
tion.   The  very   fact  of  massive  resettlement     nullified     a precious    legacy 
of  local   agricultural      and  pastoral    knowledge    and,  with   it,  some   thirty 
to  forty    thousand    functioning     communities,      most   of  them   in  regions 
that   had  regularly    produced    food  surpluses. 
      A  typical   cultivator     in  Tigray,   a location    singled   out  for  harsh   mea- 
sures,   planted   an  average   of  fifteen   crops  a  season  (such  cereal   crops 

268
                                                                          Villagization in Tanzania 25 1 









                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         








33. Aerial view of a resettlement site in southwestern Ethiopia, 1986 


as teff, barley, wheat,  sorghum,  corn,  millet;  such  root crops  as sweet 
potatoes, potatoes,  onions;  some legumes, including   horsebeans, len- 
tils,  and chickpeas;  and  a number  of vegetable  crops,  including   pep- 
pers, okra, and  many others).lol  It  goes without  saying that the  farmer 
was familiar   with  each of several  varieties  of any crop,  when  to plant 
it, how  deeply to  sow it, how  to prepare  the soil,  and how  to tend  and 
harvest it.  This knowledge  was place specific in  the sense that the  suc- 
cessful growing  of any variety  required  local  knowledge  about rainfall 
and  soils,  down  to  and  including   the  peculiarities    of  each plot   the 
farmer                           It~ultivated.~"~was  also place specific in the sense that much of 
this knowledge  was stored  in the collective   memory  of the locality:   an 
oral archive  of techniques,  seed varieties,  and ecological  information. 
     Once the  farmer  was  moved, often  to  a vastly different   ecological 
setting, his  local knowledge  was all  but useless. As Jason Clay empha- 
sizes, "Thus, when  a farmer   from  the highlands  is  transported  to  set- 
tlement  camps  in   areas like   Gambella,  he  is  instantly   transformed 
from  an  agricultural    expert  to  an  unskilled,   ignorant   laborer,  com- 
pletely  dependent  for  his survival   on the  central  government."lo3  Re- 
settlement was  far more  than a change  in scenery. It took  people from 
a setting in which  they  had the skills and  resources to produce many  of 
their   own  basic  needs  and  hence  the  means  of  a  reasonably   self- 
sufficient  independence.   It  then  transferred   them to  a setting  where 
these skills  were of  little  or  no avail.  Only  in such  circumstances  was 

269
252 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


it possible  for camp  officials  to reduce  migrants  to mendicants  whose 
obedience and labor  could be exacted for  subsistence rations. 
     Although  the drought  that  coincided  with  forced migration   in Ethi- 
opia was real  enough,  much of  the famine  to which   international   aid 
agencies responded was a product   of the massive resettlement.lo4 The 
destruction  of  social ties  was almost  as productive  of  famine  as were 
the crop  failures  induced  by poor  planning  and  ignorance  of the  new 
agricultural    environment.    Communal   ties,   relations   with   kin   and 
affines, networks  of reciprocity   and cooperation,   local charity   and de- 
pendence had been the  principal   means by which   villagers  had man- 
aged to survive  periods of  food shortage  in the past.  Stripped  of these 
social resources by  indiscriminate   deportations,   often separated  from 
their immediate  family  and forbidden  to leave, the settlers in the  camps 
were  far  more  vulnerable  to  starvation   than  they  had  been in  their 
home regions. 
     The immanent  logic,  never achieved,  of the Dergue's rural  policy  is 
telling.  If implemented   successfully, rural  Ethiopians  would  have been 
permanently   settled  along  the main   roads  in  large,  legible  villages, 
where uniform,   numbered  houses would  have  been set in  a grid  cen- 
tered on the headquarters  of the peasant association (that is, the party), 
where  the  chairman,   his  deputies,  and the  militia    maintained   their 
posts. Designated crops  would  have been grown collectively,  with  ma- 
chinery,  on flat  fields  laid  out  uniformly   by  state surveyors  and  then 
harvested for delivery  to state agencies for distribution  and sale abroad. 
Labor  would  have been closely  supervised by  experts and  cadres. In- 
tended  to modernize   Ethiopian   agriculture    and, not  incidentally,    to 
strengthen  the control   of the  Dergue,  the policy  was  literally   fatal  to 
hundreds of thousands  of cultivators  and, finally,  to the Dergue  itself. 


Conclusion 

     In quiet and untroubled times, it seems to every administrator that it is only by 
    his efforts that the whole population under his rule is kept going, and in this 
    consciousness of being indispensable every administrator finds the chief re- 
    ward of his labor and efforts. While the sea of history remains calm the ruler- 
    administrator in his frail bark, holding it with a boat hook to the ship of the 
    people and himself moving, naturally imagines that his efforts move the ship he 
    is holding on to. But as soon as a storm arises and the sea begins to heave and 
    the ship to move, such a delusion is no longer possible. The ship moves inde- 
    pendently with its own enormous motion, the boat hook no longer reaches the 
    moving vessel, and suddenly the administrator, instead of appearing a ruler and 
     a source of power, becomes an insignificant, useless, feeble man. 
     -Leo  Tolstoy, War and Peace 

270
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 253 


The conflict  between the  officials  and specialists  actively  planning  the 
future  on one hand  and the peasantry  on  the other  has been billed  by 
the first  group  as a struggle  between  progress  and obscurantism,   ra- 
tionality  and superstition,   science and religion.  Yet it  is apparent  from 
the high-modernist  schemes we have examined that the "rational"  plans 
they imposed  were often  spectacular  failures.  As units  of production, 
as human   communities,   or   as a  means  of  delivering   services,  the 
planned villages  failed  the people  they were  intended,  sometimes sin- 
cerely, to  serve. In  the  long  run  they even  failed  their  originators   as 
units  of growing   appropriation   or  as a way  of securing  the loyalty   of 
the rural  population,  although  they  may have still  served effectively, in 
the short run  at least,  as a way of detaching  a population  from  its  cus- 
tomary  social network  and  thus thwarting   collective  protest. 


High Modernism and the Optics of Power 

     If  the plans for villagization   were  so rational  and scientific,  why did 
they bring  about such  general ruin?  The answer, I believe,  is that such 
plans were  not scientific   or rational   in  any meaningful   sense of those 
terms.  What these planners   carried  in  their  mind's  eye was a certain 
aesthetic,  what  one might   call  a visual  codification   of  modern  rural 
production  and  community  life.  Like  a religious  faith,  this visual  codi- 
fication  was almost impervious  to  criticism  or  disconfirming   evidence. 
The belief  in  large  farms,  monocropping,    "proper"   villages,  tractor- 
plowed  fields,  and collective   or  communal  farming   was an  aesthetic 
conviction  undergirded   by a conviction  that  this was the way  in which 
the world  was headed-a     teleology.lo5 For all but a handful  of special- 
ists, these were not  empirical  hypotheses derived  from  particular   con- 
texts in  the temperate  West that  would  have to be carefully   examined 
in practice.  In  a given historical   and social  context-say,    wheat grow- 
ing by  farmers  breaking  new  ground  on the plains  of  Kansas-many 
elements of this  faith  might  have made sense.lo6 As a faith, however, it 
was generalized  and  applied  uncritically    in widely  divergent   settings 
with  disastrous  results. 
     If  the proverbial   man from  Mars  were to stumble  on the facts here, 
he could  be  forgiven  if  he were  confused  about  exactly who  was  the 
empiricist   and who  was the true believer.  Tanzanian peasants had, for 
example, been readjusting  their  settlement  patterns  and farming  prac- 
tices in accordance  with  climate  changes, new crops, and new markets 
with   notable  success  in  the  two  decades  before  villagization.    They 
seemed to  have  an eminently   empirical,   albeit   cautious,  outlook   on 
their  own  practices.  By contrast,  specialists  and politicians   seemed to 

271
254 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


be in the  unshakable  grip  of a quasi-religious   enthusiasm  made  even 
more potent  in being backed  by the state. 
     This  was not  just  any  faith.  It  had  a direct   relation   to the  status 
and interests of its  bearers. Because the bearers of this  visual codifica- 
tion  saw themselves as self-conscious   modernizers  of  their  societies, 
their  vision  required   a  sharp  and  morally   loaded  contrast  between 
what  looked  modern  (tidy, rectilinear,   uniform,   concentrated,  simpli- 
fied, mechanized) and what looked primitive   (irregular,  dispersed, com- 
plicated, unmechanized).  As the technical  and political  elite  with  a mo- 
nopoly on modern  education, they used this visual  aesthetic of progress 
to define their  historic  mission and to enhance their  status. 
     Their  modernist   faith   was self-serving   in  other  respects  as well. 
The very idea  of a national  plan,  which  would   be devised at the  capi- 
tal  and  would  then  reorder   the  periphery   after   its own   image  into 
quasi-military   units  obeying  a single  command,  was profoundly   cen- 
tralizing.   Each unit  at the periphery  was tied  not so much to  its neigh- 
boring  settlement as to the  command  center in the  capital;  the lines of 
communication   rather   resembled  the converging   lines used  to orga- 
nize perspective   in  early  Renaissance paintings.   "The  convention  of 
perspective  . . . centers everything   in the eye of the  beholder. It  is like 
a beam  from   a lighthouse-only       instead  of  travelling   outward,   ap- 
pearances travel  in. The conventions  called  those appearances reality. 
Perspective makes the single eye the center of the visible  world.  Every- 
thing  converges on the eye as to the vanishing point  of infinity.  The vis- 
ible  world   is  arranged   for  the  spectator   as the  universe  was  once 
thought  to be arranged  for God."Io7 
     The  image  of coordination    and  authority   aspired  to  here  recalls 
that of  mass exercises-thousands    of bodies moving  in  perfect unison 
according  to a meticulously  rehearsed script.  When  such coordination 
is achieved, the spectacle may  have several effects. The demonstration 
of mass coordination,   its designers hope,  will  awe spectators  and par- 
ticipants  with  its display of powerful   cohesion. The awe is enhanced by 
the  fact  that,  as in  the  Taylorist   factory,  only  someone  outside  and 
above the  display  can  fully  appreciate  it  as  a totality;   the individual 
participants   at ground   level are small  molecules  within   an  organism 
whose brain   is elsewhere.  The image  of  a nation  that  might   operate 
along these lines is enormously  flattering   to elites at the apex-and,     of 
course, demeaning  to a population  whose role  they thus reduce to that 
of  ciphers.  Beyond  impressing   observers,  such displays  may,  in  the 
short run  at least, constitute  a reassuring  self-hypnosis which  serves to 
reinforce  the moral  purpose  and self-confidence  of the elites.IO8 
     The modernist  visual aesthetic  that animated  planned villages  has a 

272
                                                                    Villagization in Tanzania 255 

curiously static quality to it. It  is rather like a completed picture that 
cannot be improved upon.lo9 Its design is the result of scientific and 
technical laws, and the implicit assumption is that, once built, the task 
then becomes one of maintaining its form. The planners aim to have 
each new village look like the last. Like a Roman military commander 
entering a new camp, the official arriving from Dar es Salaam would 
know exactly where everything could be found, from the TANU head- 
quarters to the peasant association and the health clinic. Every field 
and every house would also, in principle, be nearly identical and lo- 
cated according to an overall scheme. To the degree that this vision 
had been realized in practice, it would have made absolutely no con- 
nections to the particularities of  place and time. It would be a view 
from  nowhere. Instead of  the  unrepeatable variety of  settlements 
closely adjusted to local ecology and subsistence routines and instead 
of the constantly changing local response to shifts in demography, cli- 
mate, and markets, the state would have created thin, generic villages 
that were uniform  in  everything from political  structure  and social 
stratification to cropping techniques. The number of variables at play 
would be minimized. In their perfect legibility and sameness, these vil- 
lages would be ideal, substitutable bricks in an edifice of state plan- 
ning. Whether they would function was another matter. 


The Failure of Grids 

    Ideas cannot digest reality. 
     -  Jean-Paul Sartre 

     It is far easier for would-be reformers to change the formal struc- 
ture of  an institution  than to  change its practices. Redesigning the 
lines and boxes in an organizational chart is simpler than changing 
how that organization in fact operates. Changing the rules and regula- 
tions is simpler than eliciting behavior that conforms to them.110 Re- 
designing the physical layout of a village is simpler than transforming 
its social and productive  life. For obvious reasons, political elites- 
particularly authoritarian  high-modernist elites-typically  begin with 
changes in the formal structure  and rules. Such legal and statutory 
changes are the most accessible and the easiest to rearrange. 
     Anyone who has worked in a formal organization-even   a small 
one strictly  governed by detailed rules-knows  that  handbooks and 
written  guidelines fail utterly  in explaining how the institution  goes 
successfully about its work. Accounting for its smooth operation are 
nearly endless and shifting sets of implicit understandings, tacit coor- 

273
256 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


dinations,  and  practical   mutualities   that  could  never be successfully 
captured in  a written   code. This ubiquitous  social  fact is useful  to em- 
ployees and labor unions.  The premise behind  what are tellingly  called 
work-to-rule   strikes is a case in point.  When Parisian taxi  drivers  want 
to press a point on the  municipal  authorities   about regulations  or fees, 
they sometimes launch  a work-to-rule    strike. It  consists merely  in  fol- 
lowing  meticulously  all  the regulations  in  the Code routier and thereby 
bringing  traffic  throughout  central  Paris to  a grinding  halt. The drivers 
thus take tactical  advantage  of the fact  that the  circulation   of traffic  is 
possible  only  because drivers   have mastered   a set of  practices  that 
have evolved outside,  and often  in  contravention,   of the formal   rules. 
     Any attempt  to  completely  plan  a village,  a city, or, for  that matter, 
a language is  certain  to run  afoul  of the  same social reality.  A village, 
city, or  language  is the  jointly   created,  partly  unintended   product  of 
many, many  hands. To the  degree that  authorities   insist on  replacing 
this  ineffably  complex  web  of  activity   with  formal   rules  and regula- 
tions, they  are certain  to disrupt  the web in  ways that they cannot  pos- 
sibly foresee.111 This point is most frequently made by such proponents 
of laissez-faire  as Friedrich  Hayek, who  are fond  of pointing  out that  a 
command  economy, however  sophisticated   and legible,  cannot  begin 
to replace  the myriad,  rapid,   mutual  adjustments  of functioning   mar- 
kets and the price  system.112In  this context, however, the point applies 
in  important   ways to the  even more  complex patterns   of social  inter- 
action  with  the  material  environment   that  we  call a  city or  a village. 
Cities with   a long history  may  be called  "deep" or  "thick"  cities  in the 
sense that they  are the  historical   product  of  a vast number  of  people 
from  all stations  (including  officialdom)   who  are long gone. It  is possi- 
ble, of course, to build  a new city  or a new village,  but it will  be a "thin" 
or  "shallow"   city,  and its  residents  will   have to begin  (perhaps  from 
known  repertoires)   to make it  work  in  spite of  the rules.  In cases like 
Brasilia  or  Tanzania's planned  villages, one  can understand  why state 
planners  may prefer  a freshly  cleared site and  a "shocked" population 
moved abruptly   to the  new setting  in  which  the planners'  influence  is 
maximized.  The alternative  is to reform  in  situ an existing,  functioning 
community  that  has more social  resources for  resisting and  refashion- 
ing the  transformation   planned  for it. 
     The thinness  of artificially   designed communities   can be compared 
to  the   thinness  of   artificially    designed   languages.'I3  Communities 
planned  at a single stroke -Brasilia     or the planned  village in  Tanzania 
or Ethiopia-are      to older,  unplanned  communities  as Esperanto  is to, 
say, English or Burmese.  One can in fact design a new language  that in 
many respects is  more logical,  simpler,  more universal,  and  less irreg- 

274
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 257 


ular  and that  would  technically   lend  itself  to more  clarity   and preci- 
sion. This was, of  course, precisely  the objective  of Esperanto's  inven- 
tor, Lazar  Zamenhof,  who  also  imagined  that  Esperanto,   which  was 
also known  as international   language,  would  eliminate   the parochial 
nationalisms   of  Europe.lI4  Yet  it  is  also  perfectly   obvious  why   Es- 
peranto,  which  lacked  a powerful  state to  enforce  its adoption,  failed 
to replace the existing  vernaculars  or dialects  of Europe.  (As social lin- 
guists  are fond  of  saying,  "A national   language  is  a  dialect  with   an 
army.") It  was an exceptionally  thin  language, without   any of the  reso- 
nances,  connotations,   ready  metaphors,   literature,   oral   history,  id- 
ioms, and  traditions   of practical   use that  any socially  embedded  lan- 
guage  already  had.   Esperanto   has  survived   as  a kind   of   utopian 
curiosity,  a very thin  dialect  spoken by  a handful  of intelligentsia   who 
have kept its promise  alive. 


The Miniaturization  of Perfection and Control 

     The pretense of authoritarian   high-modernist   schemes to discipline 
virtually   everything  within   their  ambit  is bound  to encounter   intract- 
able  resistance.  Social   inertia,   entrenched  privileges,   international 
prices, wars,  environmental  change,  to mention  only a few factors,  en- 
sure that the  results of high-modernist   planning  will  look  substantially 
different   from  what  was  originally   imagined.   Such  is  even the  case 
where, as in Stalinist   collectivization,   the state devotes great resources 
to  enforcing  a  high  degree of  formal  compliance   with  its  directives. 
Those who have  their  hearts set on realizing   such plans  cannot fail  to 
be frustrated  by stubborn  social  realities  and material  facts. 
     One response to  this frustration   is a retreat  to the  realm of  appear- 
ances and  miniatures-to       model  cities  and  Potemkin  villages,   as it 
were.Il5  It is  easier to build  Brasilia   than to  fundamentally   transform 
Brazil  and Brazilians.   The effect of this  retreat  is to create a small, rel- 
atively  self-contained, utopian  space where high-modernist   aspirations 
might  more nearly be realized.  The limiting  case, where control  is max- 
imized  but  impact  on  the external   world  is  minimized,   is in  the  mu- 
seum or  the theme park.Il6 
     This  miniaturization    of  perfection,   I think,  has  a logic  all its  own, 
in  spite  of  its  implicit   abandonment   of  large-scale  transformations. 
Model  villages, model cities,  military  colonies, show  projects, and dem- 
onstration  farms offer  politicians,  administrators,  and specialists  an op- 
portunity   to create a sharply  defined experimental  terrain  in  which  the 
number  of rogue variables  and unknowns  are minimized.   If, of  course, 
such  experiments  make it  successfully  from  the pilot  stage to  general 

275
258 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


application,  then  they are a perfectly  rational  form  of policy  planning. 
There  are advantages  to  miniaturization.     The  constriction    of focus 
makes possible a far higher  degree of  social control  and discipline.   By 
concentrating   the material   and  personnel  resources of  the  state at a 
single point,  miniaturization   can  approximate  the architecture,  layout, 
mechanization,   social  services, and  cropping  patterns   that  its vision 
calls for. Small  islands of order and modernity,  as Potemkin well under- 
stood, are politically   useful to officials  who want  to please their  superi- 
ors with  an example of what they can accomplish.  If  their superiors  are 
sufficiently  closeted and  misinformed,   they may mistake,  as Catherine 
the Great apparently  did with  Potemkin's convincing  scenery, the exem- 
plary  instance  for  the  larger  reality.ll'    The effect  is to  banish  at  one 
place and  one time,  in  a kind  of high-modernist    version  of Versailles 
and Le Petit  Trianon,  the larger  loss of control. 
     The  visual  aesthetic  of miniaturization     seems significant   as well. 
Just as the architectural   drawing,  the  model, and  the map are ways of 
dealing  with  a larger  reality  that  is not  easily grasped  or manageable 
in  its entirety,  the miniaturization     of high-modernist   development  of- 
fers a visually  complete  example of what  the future  looks like. 
     Miniaturization     of  one kind  or  another  is ubiquitous.   It  is tempt- 
ing  to wonder   whether  the  human  tendency  to  miniaturization-to 
create  "toys"   of larger   objects and  realities   that  cannot  so easily be 
manipulated-does       not  also  have  a  bureaucratic   equivalent.   Yi-fu 
Tuan has  brilliantly    examined  how  we  miniaturize,   and  thereby  do- 
mesticate,  the  larger  phenomena  that  are  outside  our  control,   often 
with  benign  intentions.   Under  this elastic  rubric,   he includes  bonsai, 
bonseki, and  gardens (a miniaturization   of  the plant world)   along with 
dolls and dollhouses,  toy locomotives,  toy soldiers and weapons of  war, 
and  "living  toys"  in the  form  of specially  bred  fish  and dogs.l18 While 
Tuan concentrates on  more or less playful  domestication,  something  of 
the same desire for  control  and mastery  can also, it would  seem, oper- 
ate on the  larger  scale of bureaucracies.  Just  as substantive goals, the 
achievement  of which  are hard to measure, may be supplanted  by thin, 
notional   statistics-the      number   of  villages   formed,  the  number   of 
acres plowed-so     may they also be supplanted  by microenvironments 
of modernist  order. 
      Capital  cities, as the  seat of the  state and of  its rulers,  as the sym- 
bolic  center  of (new)  nations,  and as the places where  often powerful 
foreigners  come, are  most likely  to receive  close attention  as veritable 
theme parks  of high-modernist   development.  Even in  their  contempo- 
rary  secular guises, national  capitals  retain  something of the older  tra- 
dition  of  being sacred centers  for a national   cult. The  symbolic power 

276
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 259 


of high-modernist    capitals  depends  not, as  it  once did,  on  how  well 
they represent a sacred past but rather  on how  fully  they symbolize the 
utopian  aspirations   that  rulers  hold  for  their   nations.  As ever,  to be 
sure, the display is meant to exude power  as well as the authority  of the 
past or of the  future. 
     Colonial  capitals  were fashioned  with  these functions  in mind.  The 
imperial  capital  of New Delhi,  designed by Edwin  Lutyens,  was a stun- 
ning  example of  a capital   intended  to overawe  its  subjects  (and per- 
haps its own  officials)  with  its  scale and its  grandeur,  with  its proces- 
sional axes for parades demonstrating  military  power  and its triumphal 
arches. New Delhi was naturally  intended as a negation of what then be- 
came Old Delhi.  One central  purpose  of the new  capital  was captured 
nicely  by the private  secretary  to  George V in  a note about  the future 
residence of the British  viceroy.  It must, he wrote,  be "conspicuous and 
commanding,"  not  dominated  by the  structures  of  past empires  or by 
the features of the natural  landscape. "We must now let  [the Indian]  see 
for the first  time  the power  of Western science, art,  and ci~ilization."~~~ 
Standing  at its center for  a ceremonial  occasion, one might  forget for  a 
moment that  this tiny  gem of imperial   architecture  was all but  lost in  a 
vast sea of  Indian  realities  which   either  contradicted   it  or paid  it  no 
heed. 
     A great  many  nations,   some of  them  former  colonies,   have built 
entirely   new  capitals   rather  than   compromise   with   an  urban  past 
that their  leaders  were determined  to  transcend;  one thinks  of Brazil, 
Pakistan, Turkey, Belize,  Nigeria,  the  Ivory  Coast, Malawi,  and Tanza- 
nia.120 Most were  built   following   the  plans   of  Western or   Western- 
trained  architects,  even when they attempted to incorporate   references 
to vernacular   building  traditions.   As Lawrence  Vale points  out,  many 
new capitals  seem intended   as completed  and self-contained   objects. 
No subtraction,   addition,   or  modification   is contemplated-only       ad- 
miration.  And  in their  strategic  use of hills and elevation,  of complexes 
set behind  walls  or water  barriers,   of finely  graded  structural   hierar- 
chy reflecting   function   and status,  they also  convey an impression   of 
hegemony  and domination   which   was unlikely   to prevail  beyond  the 
city  limits.121 
     Nyerere  planned  a new capital,  Dodoma,  that  was to be somewhat 
different.   The ideological   commitments   of the  regime  were  to be ex- 
pressed in an architecture  that was purposely  not monumental.  Several 
interconnected  settlements would  undulate  with the landscape, and the 
modest  scale of the  buildings   would  eliminate  the  need for  elevators 
and air  conditioning.    Dodoma  was very definitely,  however,  intended 
to  be a utopian  space that  both  represented  the  future  and  explicitly 

277
260 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


negated Dar es Salaam. The master  plan for  Dodoma  condemned Dar 
as a "dominant  focus of development,  . . . the antithesis  of what Tanza- 
nia is aiming  for,  and is growing   at a pace, which   if not  checked, will 
damage the city  as a humanist  habitat  and Tanzania  as an egalitarian 
socialist-state."122 While planning   villages  for  everyone  else whether 
they liked  it or not,  the rulers  also designed for  themselves a new sym- 
bolic  center  incorporating,    not  by accident,   I think,   a hilltop   refuge 
amidst manicured,   orderly  surroundings. 
     If  the intractable  difficulties   of transforming   existing cities  can lead 
to the temptation  to  erect a model capital  city, so can the  difficulties  of 
transforming   existing  villages  prompt   a retreat  into  miniaturization. 
One major  variant  of  this tendency  was the  creation  of carefully   con- 
trolled  production   environments  by  frustrated  colonial  extension  offi- 
cers.  Coulson  notes  the  logic   involved:   "If   a  farmer   could  not   be 
forced,  or persuaded,  the  only alternatives   were to  ignore  them  alto- 
gether  andgo  for  mechanized  agriculture   controlled   by outsiders  (as 
in  the Groundnuts   Scheme,  or  on  settler  farms  controlled   by Euro- 
peans), or to  take them  right  away from  the traditional    surroundings, 
to settlement  schemes  where in  return   for  receiving  land  they might 
perhaps agree to follow   the instructions   of the agricultural   staff."123 
     Still   another  variant   was the  attempt  to  distill  out  of  the  general 
population   a cadre  of progressive  farmers  who  would  then  be mobi- 
lized  to practice   modern  agriculture.   Such  policies  were followed   in 
elaborate  detail  in  Mozambique  and were  important   in  colonial  Tan- 
zania  as well.124 When the state  confronted   a "brick  wall   of peasant 
conservatism,"  notes  a 1956  document  from  the  Tanganyika  Depart- 
ment of Agriculture,    it became necessary "to  withdraw  the  effort from 
some portions  so as to  concentrate  on small  selected points,  a proce- 
dure which  has come to be known  as the 'focal-point   approach."'12S In 
their  desire  to isolate  the  small  sector  of the agricultural    population 
that they thought  would  respond to scientific  agriculture,   the extension 
agents frequently  overlooked  other  realities  that bore  directly  on their 
substantive   mission-realities       that  were   under  their   nose  but  not 
under  their  aegis. Pauline Peters thus  describes an effort  in Malawi   to 
depopulate  a rural  area of all  but those whom  the agricultural   author- 
ities had  designated "master  farmers." Extension  agents were attempt- 
ing  to  create  a  microlandscape   of  "neatly-bounded,    mixed-farming 
lot[s]  based on rotation  of single-stand  crops  which  would  replace the 
scattered,  multi-cropped    farming   they  considered  backward.   In  the 
meantime,  they  entirely  ignored   an autonomous  and  general rush  to 
plant   tobacco-the      very  transformation    they  were   trying  to  bring 
about by  force."126 

278
                                                                           Villagization in Tanzania 26 1 


     The planned   city, the  planned  village,   and  the planned   language 
(not  to mention   the  command   economy)  are,  we have  emphasized, 
likely  to  be thin  cities,  villages,   and languages.  They  are thin   in the 
sense that they cannot  reasonably  plan  for  anything  more  than  a few 
schematic aspects of the  inexhaustibly  complex  activities  that  charac- 
terize "thick"   cities  and villages.  One all-but-guaranteed   consequence 
of  such thin   planning   is  that   the  planned   institution    generates an 
unofficial  reality-a      "dark  twinM-that    arises  to perform  many  of the 
various  needs that  the planned   institution   fails  to  fulfill.   Brasilia,   as 
Holston  showed, engendered  an "unplanned  Brasilia"   of construction 
workers,  migrants,  and  those whose housing  and activities   were nec- 
essary but  were  not foreseen  or  were precluded   by the  plan.  Nearly 
every new,  exemplary  capital   city  has, as the  inevitable   accompani- 
ment  of its  official  structures,   given  rise to  another,  far more   "disor- 
derly"  and complex  city that  makes the official city work-that      is virtu- 
ally  a condition   of  its existence.  That  is, the  dark  twin  is  not just  an 
anomaly, an "outlaw  reality";   it represents  the activity  and life  without 
which  the official   city  would  cease to function.   The outlaw  city  bears 
the same relation  to the  official  city  as the Parisian taxi  drivers'  actual 
practices bear  to the Code routier. 
     On a more speculative  note,  I imagine  that the greater  the pretense 
of and insistence  on an officially   decreed  micro-order,   the greater the 
volume  of nonconforming    practices  necessary to  sustain that  fiction. 
The most rigidly   planned  economies tend  to be accompanied  by large 
"underground,   'gray,'  informal,"  economies  that  supply, in a thousand 
ways, what  the formal  economy  fails  to supply.12' When this  economy 
is ruthlessly   suppressed, the  cost  has often  been economic   ruin  and 
starvation   (the  Great  Leap Forward   and  the  Cultural   Revolution   in 
China;  the  autarkic,  moneyless  economy  of Pol  Pot's Cambodia).  Ef- 
forts to  force a country's  inhabitants  to  maintain  permanent,  fixed res- 
idences tend  to  produce  large,  illegal,  undocumented   populations   in 
urban  areas where they have been forbidden  to go.128 The insistence on 
a rigid  visual  aesthetic  at the core  of the capital  city  tends to  produce 
settlements  and  slums  teeming  with   squatters  who,  as often  as not, 
sweep the  floors,  cook  the meals,  and  tend the  children   of the  elites 
who  work  in the decorous,  planned  center.129 

279
8      Taming          Nature: 
        An     Agriculture                of    Legibility 
        and      Simplicity 


              Yes, enumerate the carriage parts- 
               Still not a carriage. 

               When you begin making decisions and cutting it up 
                 rules and names appear 
               And once names appear, you should know when to stop. 
               -Tao-te-ching 



The necessarily simple abstractions of large bureaucratic institutions, 
as we have seen, can never adequately represent the actual complexity 
of natural or social processes. The categories that they employ are too 
coarse, too static, and too stylized to do justice to the world that they 
purport to describe. 
    For reasons that will become apparent, state-sponsored high- 
modernist agriculture has recourse to abstractions of the same order. 
The simple "production and profit" model of agricultural extension 
and agricultural research has failed in important ways to represent the 
complex, supple, negotiated objectives of real farmers and their com- 
munities. That model has also failed to represent the space in which 
farmers plant crops-its microclimates, its moisture and water move- 
ment, its microrelief, and its local biotic history. Unable to effectively 
represent the profusion and complexity of real farms and real fields, 
high-modernist agriculture has often succeeded in radically simplify- 
ing those farms and fields so they can be more directly apprehended, 
controlled, and managed. I emphasize the radical simplification of agri- 
cultural high modernism because agriculture is, even in its most rudi- 
mentary, neolithic forms, inevitably a process of simplifying the floral 
profusion of nature.' How else are we to understand the process by 
which man has encouraged certain species of flora that he found use- 
ful and discouraged others that he found a nuisance? 
    The logic behind the radical simplification of the field is almost pre- 
cisely identical to the logic behind the radical simplification of the 
forest. In fact, a simplified agriculture, which was developed earlier, 

280
                                                                                        Taming Nature 263 


served as the  model  for  scientific   forestry.  The guiding   idea was  the 
maximization   of the crop yield  or pr~fit.~The  forests were  reconceptu- 
alized as "timber   farms"  in which   a single species of tree  was planted 
in straight   rows and  harvested  like a crop  when  it  was "mature."  The 
preconditions  of such  simplifications   were the existence of a commod- 
ity market  and  competitive  pressure,  on states as well  as on entrepre- 
neurs, to  maximize  profits  or  revenue.  In the  monocropped  field  and 
single-species forest  alike,  the innumerable   other  members  of the  bi- 
otic community   were  ignored  unless they had some  direct bearing  on 
the health  and yield  of the species to be harvested.  Such narrowing   of 
attention  to a single outcome-invariably       the one of most commercial 
or fiscal  interest-confers       an analytical   power  that  allows   foresters 
and agronomists  to track carefully  the  influence of other  factors on this 
single dependent variable.  Within  its  ambit,  there is no denying the  ex- 
traordinary   power  of this approach  to increase  yields. As we shall  see, 
however, this potent  but narrow  perspective  is troubled both  by certain 
inevitable  blind  spots and by  phenomena that  lie outside  its restricted 
field  of  vision.   To continue   the  metaphor,   this  narrowness   in  turn 
means that production   agronomy  is occasionally  blindsided  by factors 
outside its analytical   focus and is forced,  by the resulting  crisis, to take 
a broader perspective. 
     The  question  we  shall  address in  this  chapter   is why  a model  of 
modern,  scientific   agriculture   that  has apparently  been  successful in 
the temperate,  industrializing   West has so often foundered in the Third 
World. In  spite of these indifferent   results,  the model has been pressed 
by colonial  modernizers,   independent   states, and international   agen- 
cies. In  Africa,  where  the results  have  been particularly   sobering,  an 
agronomist  with  great  experience has claimed  that  "one of the crucial 
lessons of the  past fifty  years  or so of  ecological  research  focused on 
African  agriculture   is  that  the 'dramatic   modernization'   option   has a 
track  record  so poor that  a return to  slower and  more incremental   ap- 
proaches must  now be given  serious and sustained  attention.'I3 
     We will  not  be much concerned  in this  discussion  with the  particu- 
lar reasons that made this  scheme or that cropping  plan fail.  To be sure, 
the familiar  bureaucratic   pathologies as well  as openly predatory prac- 
tices have often greatly compounded  these failures.  My claim, however, 
is that the  origin  of these failures  can be traced to  a deeper level; these 
were, in other  words, systemic  failures and would  have occurred  under 
the best assumptions  about administrative   efficiency and probity. 
     At least four  elements seem to be at work  in these systemic failures. 
The first  two are  linked  to the historical   origin  and  institutional   nexus 
of high-modernist    agriculture.   First,  given  their  discipline's   origin  in 

281
264 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


the temperate,  industrializing   West, the bearers of  modernism  in agri- 
cultural  planning  inherited   a series of unexamined  assumptions about 
cropping  and field  preparation   that turned   out to work  badly  in other 
contexts. Second, given the presumptions   about expertise embodied  in 
modernist  agricultural   planning,  the  actual schemes were  continually 
bent to serve the  power  and status  of officials  and  of the state  organs 
they ~ontrolled.~ 
     The third  element,  however, operates at a deeper level:  it is the  sys- 
tematic, cyclopean  shortsightedness of high-modernist   agriculture  that 
courts certain   forms of  failure.  Its  rigorous  attention  to  productionist 
goals casts into relative obscurity  all  the outcomes lying outside  the im- 
mediate relationship   between farm  inputs  and yields.  This means that 
both long-term  outcomes  (soil structure,  water  quality,  land-tenure  re- 
lations) and third-party   effects, or  what welfare  economists call  "exter- 
nalities," receive little  attention  until   they begin to affect  production. 
     Finally, the very strength of scientific  agricultural   experimentation- 
its simplifying   assumptions and its ability   to isolate the impact  of a sin- 
gle variable  on  total  production-is      incapable   of dealing  adequately 
with  certain  forms  of complexity.  It  tends to ignore,  or  discount,  agri- 
cultural  practices  that  are not assimilable  to  its techniques. 
     Lest there be any  misunderstanding  about  my purpose here,  I want 
to emphasize that  this  is not a general  offensive against  modern  agro- 
nomic science, let  alone an attack  on the culture  of scientific  research. 
Modern agronomic  science, with  its sophisticated  plant breeding,  plant 
pathology, analysis of plant  nutrition,   soil analysis, and  technical virtu- 
osity, is responsible for creating  a fund of technical  knowledge that is by 
now being  used in some form  by even the most  traditional   cultivators. 
My purpose,  rather,  is  to show  how  the  imperial  pretensions of  agro- 
nomic science-its    inability  to  recognize or incorporate  knowledge cre- 
ated outside  its paradigm-sharply      limited   its utility   to many  cultiva- 
tors.  Whereas farmers,   as we  shall  see, seem pragmatically    alert  to 
knowledge  coming  from   any quarter   should  it  serve  their  purposes, 
modern  agricultural   planners   are far  less receptive  to  other  ways  of 
knowing. 


Varieties  of Agricultural      Simplification 

Early Agriculture 

     Cultivation   is simplification.    Even the  most cursory  forms  of  agri- 
culture  typically  produce  a floral  landscape that is less diverse than  an 
unmanaged  landscape.  The crops  that  mankind  has  cultivated  have, 

282
                                                                                        Taming Nature 265 


when  fully  domesticated,  become  dependent  for  their  survival   upon 
the management  of cultivators-such      activities  as making  a clearing, 
burning  brush, breaking  the soil, weeding,  pruning,  manuring.  Strictly 
speaking, a crop  in the field  is not an artificial   landscape, inasmuch  as 
all  fauna,  not excluding   human  beings, modify   their  environment   in 
the course of food  gathering.  What  is certain,  however, is that  most  of 
Homo sapiens's cultivars   have been  so adapted to  their  altered  land- 
scape that they  have become "'biological    monsters' " which  could  not 
survive in  the wild.5 
     Millennia    of  variation   and   conscious  human   selection  have  fa- 
vored  cultivars  that  are  systematically   different   from  their  wild   and 
weedy  cousin^.^ Our convenience has led us to prefer  plants  that  have 
large seeds and are easy to germinate,  have more blossoms  and hence 
more fruit,  and  whose fruits  are more easily threshed  or shelled.  Culti- 
vated maize thus  has a few large  ears with large  kernels whereas  wild 
or semidomesticated   maizes have very small  cobs with  small  kernels. 
The difference   is most  starkly  captured   by the  contrast  between  the 
huge, seed-laden commercial   sunflower  and  its diminutive   woodland 
relative. 
     Beyond  the question of the harvest  itself, of course, cultivators   have 
also selected for  scores of other  properties:  texture,  flavor,  color, stor- 
age quality, aesthetic  value, grinding  and  cooking qualities,   and so on. 
The breadth of human  purposes has led not to a single, ideal  cultivar  of 
each species but  rather  to  a great  many varieties,   each distinctive   in 
some important   way.  Thus we have  the varieties  of  barley  grown  for 
porridge,  for  bread, for beer, and for  feeding livestock;  and thus "sweet 
sorghum  for  chewing,  white-seeded types  for bread,  small,  dark,  red- 
seeded types  for  beer, and  strong-stemmed,  fibrous   types for  house- 
construction   and basketry."' 
     The  greatest selection pressure,  however, came from  the  dominant 
anxiety  of cultivators:   that  they not  starve. This  most basic of  existen- 
tial  concerns  also led to a great  variety  of cultivars,  termed  the  "land- 
races"  of the  various  crops.  Landraces  are  genetically  variable   pop- 
ulations  that  respond  differently   to different   soil  conditions,  levels  of 
moisture,  temperature,  sunlight, diseases and pests, microclimates, and 
so forth.   Over time,  traditional    cultivators,   operating  as experienced 
applied  botanists,  have developed literally  thousands  of landraces  of a 
single  species. A working  knowledge  of many,  if not  all, of these  land- 
races provided   cultivators  with   enormous  flexibility   in the  face of en- 
vironmental   factors  that they could  not  contr01.~ 
      For our  purposes,  the  long  development  of  so many  landraces  is 
significant   in   at least  two  respects.  First,  while   early  farmers   were 

283
266 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


transforming  and  simplifying  their  natural  environment,   they also had 
a surpassing interest  in  fostering  a certain  kind  of  diversity.  A combi- 
nation of  their  wide interests  and their   concern about  the food supply 
impelled  them to select  and protect  many landraces.  The genetic vari- 
ability  of the crops they grew  provided  some built-in  insurance  against 
drought,  flooding,   plant  diseases, pests, and the  seasonal vagaries of 
               A ~limate.~ pathogen might affect one landrace but not another; some 
landraces would   do well  in a drought,  others  in  wet conditions;   some 
would  do well  in clayey soil,  others in sandy soil.  Placing  a large num- 
ber of prudent  bets, finely  tuned  to microlocal   conditions,   the cultiva- 
tor maximized   the dependability  of  a tolerable  harvest. 
     The variety  of landraces  is significant  in  another sense. All  modern 
crops of any economic  significance  are the product   of landraces. Until 
about  1930 all scientific  crop  breeding  was essentially a process of se- 
lection  from  among the existing  landraces.1Â Landraces and their wild 
progenitors   and "escapes"  represent  the "germ  plasm"  or  seed-stock 
capital  upon  which   modern  agriculture   is based.  In  other  words,  as 
James Boyce has put  it,  modern  varieties  and  traditional   agriculture 
are complements,  not substitutes.' 


Twentieth-Century Agriculture 

     Modern,   industrial,   scientific   farming,   which  is  characterized  by 
monocropping,   mechanization,  hybrids,   the use of fertilizers   and pes- 
ticides,  and  capital  intensiveness,  has brought   about  a level  of stan- 
dardization   into  agriculture   that  is without   historical   precedent.  Far 
beyond  mere  monocropping    on the  model   of  scientific  forestry   ex- 
plored  earlier,   this  simplification    has  entailed   a genetic  narrowing 
fraught  with  consequences that we are only beginning  to  comprehend. 
     One  of the  basic sources  of increasing   uniformity    in crops  arises 
from  the intense  commercial  pressures  to maximize  profits   in a com- 
petitive  mass market.  Thus the  effort  to increase planting   densities in 
order  to stretch   the productivity    of land  encouraged  the  adoption  of 
varieties   that  would   tolerate   crowding.    Greater  planting    densities 
have, in  turn,  intensified   the use of  commercial  fertilizers   and  there- 
fore the selection  of subspecies known for  high fertilizer   (especially ni- 
trogen) uptake  and response. At the same time,  the growth  of great su- 
permarket    chains,   with   their    standardized   routines    of  shipping, 
packaging,  and display,  has inexorably   led to  an emphasis on  unifor- 
mity  of size, shape, color,  and "eye appeal."12 The result of these pres- 
sures was  to concentrate   on  the small  number   of cultivars   that  met 
these criteria  while  abandoning  others. 

284
                                                                                        Taming Nature 267 


     The production   of uniformity    in the field  is best grasped,  however, 
through  the logic  of mechanization.   As factor prices  in  the West have, 
since at  least  1950,  favored  the  substitution   of  farm  machinery   for 
hired labor,  the farmer  has sought cultivars  that  were compatible  with 
mechanization.   That is, he  selected crops whose  architecture   did  not 
interfere   with   tractors   or   sprayers,  which   ripened   uniformly,    and 
which  could be picked  in a  "once-over"  pass of the machine. 
     Given  the techniques  of hybridization    being  developed at  roughly 
the same time,  it  was but  a short  step to  creating  new  crop  varieties 
bred explicitly   for  mechanization.   "Genetic variability,"   as Jack Ralph 
Kloppenberg   notes, "is the  enemy of  Inme~hanization."~3  the  case of 
corn,  hybridization-the        progeny  of  two  inbred   lines-produces      a 
field  of the  genetically   identical  individuals    that  are ideal  for  mech- 
anization.  Varieties  developed with  machinery  in  mind were  available 
as early  as  1920,  when  Henry  Wallace  joined   forces  with   a manu- 
facturer  of harvesting   equipment  to cultivate  his  new, stiff-stalked  va- 
riety  with   a strong  shank  connecting   the  ear to  the  stalk.  An entire 
field  of plant  breeding,  termed   "phytoengineering,"   was  thus born  in 
order  to  adapt  the natural   world  to  machine  processing.   "Machines 
are not  made  to harvest  crops,"  noted  two  proponents  of  phytoengi- 
neering.  "In   reality,  crops  must  be designed  to be  harvested  by ma- 
chine."I4  Having  been  adapted  to  the  cultivated   field,  the  crop  was 
now  adapted   to  mechanization.    The  "machine-friendly"     crop   was 
bred  to incorporate    a series of  characteristics   that  made it  easier  to 
harvest  it  mechanically.  Among  the  most important    of these charac- 
teristics  were  resilience,  a concentrated   fruit   set, uniformity   of  plant 
size and architecture,   uniformity    of fruit  shape  and size, dwarfing   (in 
the  case of  tree crops  especially),   and  fruits  that  easily  break  away 
from  the plant.15 
     The  development   of  the   "supermarket   tomato"   by  G.  C.  (Jack) 
Hanna  at  the University   of  California   at Davis  in  the late  1940s  and 
 1950s is an early and diagnostic  case.16 Spurred by the wartime  short- 
age of  field  labor,  researchers set  about inventing   a mechanical   har- 
vester  and   breeding   the  tomato   that  would   accommodate    it.  The 
tomato  plants  eventually  bred  for  the job were  hybrids  of  low stature 
and  uniform   maturity   that  produced  similarly   sized fruits   with  thick 
walls,  firm  flesh,  and no cracks;  the fruits  were  picked  green in  order 
to   avoid  being   bruised   by  the  grasp   of  the  machinery    and  were 
artificially    ripened  by ethylene gas during  transport.   The results  were 
the  small,  uniform    winter   tomatoes,  sold  four  to  a package,  which 
dominated   supermarket  shelves for  several  decades. Taste and nutri- 
tional   quality  were  secondary  to  machine  compatibility.    Or to  put  it 

285
268 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


more charitably,   the breeders did  what  they could  to develop  the best 
tomato within   the very sharp  constraints  of mechanization. 
     The imperatives   of maximizing    profits  and  hence, in  this  case, of 
mechanizing  the harvest worked  powerfully   to transform  and  simplify 
both the field and the  crop. Relatively  inflexible,  nonselective machines 
work  best in flat  fields with   identical  plants  growing  uniform   fruits  of 
perfectly  even maturity.  Agronomic   science was deployed  to approxi- 
mate this  ideal: large,  finely  graded fields;  uniform   irrigation   and  nu- 
trients to  regulate growth;  liberal   use of herbicides, fungicides,  and in- 
secticides to maintain  uniform  health;  and, above all, plant  breeding to 
create the ideal  cultivar. 


The Unintended Consequences of Simplification 

     Reviewing  the history  of major  crop  epidemics, beginning  with  the 
Irish  potato famine  in  1850, a committee of the  United States National 
Research  Council   concluded:   "These encounters   show  clearly   that 
crop mono-culture   and genetic  uniformity   invite  epidemics. All  that  is 
needed is the arrival  on the scene of a parasite that  can take advantage 
of the  vulnerability.   If  the crop  is  uniformly   vulnerable,   so much the 
better for  the parasite. In  this way virus  diseases have devastated sugar 
beets with  'yellows,'  peaches with  yellows,  potatoes with   leaf roll  and 
X and Y viruses,  cocoa with  swollen  shoot,  clover with   sudden death, 
sugarcane with  mosaic,  and rice  with  hoja  blanca."17 After a corn leaf 
blight  had devastated much  of the  1970 corn crop,  the committee  had 
been convened in order to consider the genetic vulnerability   of all major 
crops. One of  the pioneer  breeders of  hybrid  corn,  Donald Jones, had 
foreseen the  problems  that  the  loss of  genetic diversity   might  bring: 
"Genetically  uniform  pure  line varieties  are very productive  and highly 
desirable  when environmental    conditions  are  favorable  and the vari- 
eties are  well-protected   from  pests of  all  kinds. When  these external 
factors  are not favorable,  the  result can  be disastrous . . . due to  some 
new virulent  ~arasite."'~ 
     The logic  of epidemiology   in  crops is  relatively  straightforward    in 
principle.  All  plants have some resistance to pathogens; otherwise  they 
and the pathogen  (if  it preyed  upon  only that  plant)  would  disappear. 
At  the  same  time,   all  plants   are  genetically   vulnerable   to  certain 
pathogens.  If  a field  is populated  exclusively   by genetically  identical 
individuals,   such as single-cross  hybrids  or clones,  then each plant  is 
vulnerable  in exactly  the same way to the same pathogen, be it  a virus, 
fungus, bacterium,  or nematode.19 Such a field is an ideal genetic habi- 
tat for  the proliferation    of  precisely  those strains  or mutants   of path- 

286
                                                                                        Taming Nature 269 


ogens that  thrive   and  feed on  this  particular    cultivar.   The  uniform 
habitat,  especially  one in which  plants  are crowded,  exerts  a natural- 
selection pressure,  as it  were,  that  favors  such pathogens.  Given  the 
right  seasonal conditions   for  the pathogen  to  multiply   (temperature, 
humidity,  wind,   and so  on), the  classic  conditions  for   the geometric 
progression  of an epidemic  are in place.20 
     In  contrast,   diversity   is the  enemy  of  epidemics.  In   a field  with 
many species of plants,  only  a few individuals   are likely   to be suscep- 
tible  to a  given pathogen,  and  they are  likely  to  be widely  scattered. 
The mathematical   logic  of the  epidemic  is broken.21A  monocropped 
field, as the National  Research Council  report  noted, increases vulner- 
ability  appreciably  inasmuch  as all members of the  same plant species 
share much of their  genetic inheritance.   But where  a field is populated 
by many  genetically   diverse landraces   of a given  species, the  risk  is 
vastly reduced.  Any agricultural   practice  that  increases diversity   over 
time and  space, such as crop rotation  or  mixed  cropping  on a farm  or 
in a region,  acts as a barrier  to the spread  of epidemics. 
     The modern  regime of pesticide  use, which  has arisen over the past 
fifty  years, must be seen as an integral  feature  of this  genetic vulnera- 
bility,  not  as an unrelated   scientific  breakthrough.    It  is precisely  be- 
cause hybrids   are  so uniform    and hence  disease  prone  that   quasi- 
heroic  measures have to be taken to control  the environment   in which 
they are grown.   Such hybrids  are analogous  to  a human patient   with 
a compromised  immune  system who must  be kept in a sterile  field  lest 
an opportunistic   infection  take  hold. The sterile  field,  in this  case, has 
been established by the blanket  use of  pesticide^.^^ 
     Corn,  as the most widely  planted  crop in  the United  States (85 mil- 
lion  acres in  1986)23 and the first  one to  be hybridized,   has provided 
nearly  ideal conditions  for insect,  disease, and weed buildup.  Pesticide 
use is correspondingly   high.  Corn  accounts  for  one-third   of the total 
market  for herbicides  and one-quarter  of the  market for   insecticide^.^^ 
One of the long-term  effects, which  is readily   predictable  according  to 
the theory   of natural   selection,  has been  the  emergence of  resistant 
strains  among  insects,  fungi,  and  weeds,  necessitating  either  larger 
doses or  a new  set of  chemical  agents.  Some  pathogens,  again pre- 
dictably,  have developed what  is termed  "cross-resistance"  to  a whole 
class of  pesticide^.^^ As more generations of the pathogen  are exposed 
to the pesticide,  the likelihood   that resistant  strains will   emerge is cor- 
respondingly  greater. Above and beyond the troubling   consequences of 
pesticide  use for  the organic   matter  in  the soil,  groundwater   quality, 
human  health,  and the  ecosystem, pesticides  have exacerbated  some 
existing  crop diseases while  creating  new ones.26 

287
270 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


     Just prior  to the  corn leaf blight  in  the South in  1970, 71 percent of 
all acreage in  corn  was planted  to only  six hybrids.  The specialists  in- 
vestigating  the  blight   stressed  the  pressures  of  mechanization   and 
product  uniformity   that  led to a radically   narrower  genetic crop  base. 
"Uniformity,"   the  report  asserted,  "is the key  word."27 Most of the hy- 
brids had been developed by the male-sterile method  using "Texas cyto- 
plasm." It was  this uniformity   that was  attacked by the fungus Helmin- 
thosporium  maydis;   those hybrids   created  without   Texas cytoplasm 
suffered only  trivial  damage. The  pathogen was not  new; in  its report, 
the National  Research Council  committee  imagined  that  it was proba- 
bly in existence when  Squanto showed the  Pilgrims  how to plant  corn. 
While H.  maydis may  have from  time  to time  produced  more virulent 
strains,  "American  corn was  too variable to  give the new  strain  a very 
good foothold."28 What was new was the vulnerability    of the host. 
     The report  went on to document  the fact that  "most major  crops are 
impressively  uniform   genetically  and impressively   vulnerable  [to  epi- 
demic~]."~~ Exotic germ plasm from a rare  Mexican landrace  proved to 
be the solution   to breeding  new  hybrids  that  were less susceptible  to 
the blight.  In  this and  many other  cases, it was only  the genetic diver- 
sity created  by a long history   of landrace  development  by nonspecial- 
ists that provided  a way           Like the formal  order  of the planned sec- 
tion  of Brasilia   or  collectivized   agriculture,   modern,   simplified,   and 
standardized  agriculture   depends for  its existence on  a "dark twin"   of 
informal  practices  and experience  on which  it  is, ultimately,  parasitic. 


The Catechism   of High-Modernist     Agriculture 

The model  and promise  of American  agricultural    modernism  was ab- 
solutely hegemonic  in the  three decades from  1945 to 1975. It  was the 
prevailing   "export  model."  Hundreds   of irrigation    and  dam  projects 
modeled  roughly  on the Tennessee Valley Authority  (TVA) were begun; 
many large  and highly  capitalized   agricultural   schemes were inaugu- 
rated with   great fanfare;   and thousands  of advisers were  dispatched. 
There was a continuity  in personnel as well as in ideas. Economists,  en- 
gineers, agronomists,  and planners  who had served in the TVA, the U.S. 
Department  of Agriculture,  or the Department  of the Treasury moved to 
the United  Nations,  the  Food and Agriculture   Organization,   or  USAID, 
bringing  their  experience and ideas with them.  A combination  of Amer- 
ican political,   economic,  and military   hegemony, the promise  of loans 
and assistance, concerns about  world  population  and food  supply, and 
the great  productivity    of American   agriculture   made for  a  degree of 
self-confidence in  the American  model that  is hard to overestimate. 

288
                                                                                        Taming Nature 271 


     A few  skeptics like  Rachel  Carson were  beginning   to question  the 
model, but  they were  greatly  outnumbered   by a chorus  of visionaries 
who saw  an unlimited   and brilliant    future  ahead. Typical  of  the opti- 
mism was  an article  by James B.  Billard   entitled  "More  Food for  Our 
Multiplying   Millions:   The Revolution  in  American  Agriculture,"  which 
appeared  in  a 1970  issue of National                                 ItsGe~graphic.~~ vision of the 
farm  of the future,   reproduced  here  in figure  34, was  not an idle  fan- 
tasy; it was, we are told,  drawn  "with  the guidance  of U.S. Department 
of Agriculture   specialists."  Billard's   text  is one long  paean  to mecha- 
nization,  scientific   marvels,  and huge scale. For  all the technical   wiz- 
ardry,  he envisions  a  process of  simplification    of  the landscape  and 
centralization    of  command.  Fields  will   be  larger,  with   fewer  trees, 
hedges, and  roads;  plots  may be  "several  miles  long  and a  hundred 
yards wide";  "weather  control"  will   prevent hailstorms  and  tornadoes; 
atomic energy  will  "level hills"   and make irrigation   water  from  seawa- 
ter; satellites,   sensors, and airplanes   will  spot  plant  epidemics  while 
the farmer  sits in  his control  tower. 
     At the  operational   level, the credo  of American   agriculture   for  ex- 
port  incorporated    the  same  fundamental   convictions.   Both   the  ex- 
porters  and the vast majority   of their  eager clients  were  committed  to 
the  following   truths:  the  superior   technical   efficiency  of  large-scale 
farms, the  importance  of  mechanization  to save labor  and break  tech- 
nical  bottlenecks,  the  superiority   of monocropping    and hybrids  over 
polycropping   and landraces, and the  advantages of high-input  agricul- 
ture,  including   commercial   fertilizers   and pesticides.  Above  all, they 
believed in  large,  integrated,  planned  projects  rather   than piecemeal 
improvements, partly  because the large, capital-intensive schemes could 
be planned as nearly  pure technical  exercises, rather  like  the design of 
the Soviet  collective  farm  that  was invented  in  a Chicago hotel  room. 
The greater  the industrial    content  of a scheme and  the more  its envi- 
ronment   could  be made  uniform   (through   controlled   irrigation    and 
nutrients,   the  use of tractors   and  combines,  the  development  of  flat 
fields), the  less was left to  chance.32 Local soils, local  landscape, local 
labor,  local  implements,  and  local  weather  appeared to  be almost  ir- 
relevant  to the  prepackaged  projects.  At the same time,  schemes con- 
ceived  along  these  lines  emphasized  the  technical    expertise  of  the 
planners,  the possibility   of central  control,   and, not  least, a "module" 
that  could be redeployed  to almost  any locale.  For local  elites anxious 
to have a modern  show  project  over which  they could  preside,  the ad- 
vantages were  also obvious. 
     The lamentable   fate of the vast  majority  of these projects,  whether 
private  or  public,  is  by now  a matter  of  record.33 They failed  in most 

289
                                                                                       th

                                                                                       e
                                                                                        p [To

                                                                                          
                                                                                       r v
                                                                                         i
                                                                                       in e
                                                                                       t v w
                                                                                          t
                                                                                       e h
                                                                                       r i
                                                                                       s s
                                                                                       io i
                                                                                       n m
                                                                                        o a
                                                                                       f g
                                                                                        th e
                                                                                         ,
                                                                                          
                                                                                       is re

                                                                                        title fe

                                                                                         r 
                                                                                         t
                                                                                         o
                                                                                       .]
                                                                                           







34. Illustration of the farm of the future, painted by Davis Meltzer "with the guidance of U.S. Department of Agriculture specialists," from a 
1970 issue of National Geographic. The caption details the farm of the early twenty-first century: "Grainfields stretch like fairways and cattle 
pens resemble high-rise apartments. . . . Attached to a modernistic farmhouse, a bubble-topped control tower hums with a computer, weather 
reports, and a farm-price ticker tape. A remote-controlled tiller-combine glides across the 10-mile-long wheat field on tracks that keep the 
heavy machine from compacting the soil. Threshed grain, funneled into a pneumatic tube beside the field, flows into storage elevators rising 
close to a distant city. The same machine that cuts the grain prepares the land for another crop. A similar device waters neighboring strips of 
soybeans as a jet-powered helicopter sprays insecticides. 
   'Across a service road, conical mills blend feed for beef cattle, fattening in multilevel pens that conserve ground space. Tubes carry the 
feed to be mechanically distributed. A central elevator transports the cattle up and down, while a tubular side drain flushes wastes to be bro- 
ken down for fertilizer. Beside the farther pen, a processing plant packs beef into cylinders for shipment to market by helicopter and mono- 
rail. Illuminated plastic domes provide controlled environments for growing high-value crops such as strawberries, tomatoes, and celery. 
Near a distant lake and recreation area, a pumping station supplies water for the vast operation." 

290
                                                                                        Taming Nature 273 


cases despite lavish  credit  subsidies  and strong  administrative    back- 
ing. While  each failure   had its  own peculiarities,   the  level of  abstrac- 
tion  at which  most  projects  were conceived  was fatal.  Imported   faith 
and abstraction   prevailed,  as we shall  see, over close attention  to  the 
local context. 


Modernist   Faith  Versus  Local  Practices 

We can explore the contrast between imported faith  and local context by 
juxtaposing  several tenets of  the catechism  of high-modernist   agricul- 
ture with   the local  practices that  appeared to  violate  them. And  as we 
shall see, contrary to contemporary  expectations, these practices turned 
out to be scientifically  sound and in some cases superior to the program 
of farming  being urged or  imposed by the agricultural   reformers. 


Monoculture and Polyculture 

     Nothing  better  illustrates  the myopic  credo  of high-modernist   agri- 
culture,  originating  in  temperate zones and brought to the tropics,  than 
its nearly  unshakable  faith  in the  superiority   of monoculture   over the 
practice  of polyculture   found in  much  of the Third  World. 
     To take  West African   indigenous  farming   systems as an  example, 
colonial  agricultural   specialists encountered what seemed to them to be 
an astonishingly  diverse  regime of polycropping,   with  as many as four 
crops  (not to mention  subspecies) in the same field  simultaneously.34A  
fairly   representative   instance  of  what  met  their   eyes is  depicted  in 
figure  35. The visual effect,  to Western eyes, was one of sloppiness and 
disorder.  Given  their  visual  codification   of modern  agricultural   prac- 
tice,  most  specialists  knew,  without   further   empirical   investigation, 
that  the  apparent  disorder  of  the crops  was a symptom   of backward 
techniques;  it failed  the visual  test of scientific  agriculture.   Campaigns 
to  replace   polyculture   with   pure-stand   planting   were  pushed  with 
equal  fervor   by  colonial   officials   and,  after  independence,  by  their 
local  successors. 
      We have  gradually   come  to understand   a  quite  specific   logic  of 
place-in     particular,   tropical   soils,  climate,  and ecology-that      helps 
 to explain  the functions   of polyculture.   The diversity   of species natu- 
 rally  occurring   in a tropical   setting  is, other  things  being  equal, con- 
sistently  greater than  the diversity  of species in a temperate setting.  An 
 acre of tropical   forest  will   have far  more  species of plants,   although 
 fewer individuals  of each species, than will  an acre of temperate  wood- 
 land.  Thus unmanaged  nature  in  temperate   climates  looks  more or- 

291
274 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 
















                                        [To view this image, refer to  
                                        the print version of this title.] 
                                         
                                         
                                         















                   35. Construction of stick buds across incipient gullies 
                   in a Sierra Leone rice field 


 derly because  it is  less diverse, and  this  may play  a role  in the  visual 
 culture  of                            InWe~terners.~~ favoring polyculture, the tropical cultivator 
 also imitates  nature  in  his techniques  of  cultivation.   Polyculture,  like 
 the tropical  forest itself,  plays an important  role  in protecting  thin  soils 
 from  the erosive effects  of wind,  rain,  and  sunlight.  Furthermore,   the 
 seasonality  of tropical   agriculture   is governed  more  by the  timing  of 
 rains than  by temperature.   For this  reason,  a variety  of polycropping 
 strategies allows  farmers  to  hedge their  bets about  the rains,  holding 
 the soil  with  drought-resistant    crops  and  interspersing   among them 
 crops that  can take best advantage of the  rains. Finally,  the creation  of 
 a uniform,   controlled  farming   environment  is  intrinsically   more  diffi- 
 cult  in a tropical   setting than  in  a temperate  one, and, where  popula- 

292
                                                                                        Taming Nature 275 


tion densities  are low, the labor  requirements  of extensive terracing   or 
irrigation   are uneconomic  in  the strict  neoclassical  sense of the word. 
     Here  one may  recall  Jane Jacobs's important   distinction   between 
visual  orderliness  on  one hand  and functional   working   order  on  the 
other. The city desk of a newspaper, a rabbit's  intestines, or the  interior 
of an aircraft   engine  may certainly   look  messy, but each one reflects, 
sometimes brilliantly,    an order  related  to the  function  it  performs.  In 
such instances  the  apparent   surface  disarray  obscures  a  more  pro- 
found logic.  Polyculture  was a floral  variant  of  such order. Only  a very 
few colonial  specialists managed to peer behind  the visual confusion  to 
its logic.  One of them was Howard  Jones, a mycologist in  Nigeria,  who 
wrote  in  1936: 

     [To the European] the whole  scheme seems . . . laughable and ridicu- 
     lous, and in the end he would probably conclude that it is merely foolish 
     to crowd different  plants together in this childish way so that they may 
     choke one another. Yet if one looks at it more closely there seems a rea- 
     son for everything. The plants are not growing at random, but have been 
     planted at proper  distances on hillocks of soil arranged  in such a way 
     that when rain  falls it does not waterlog the plants, nor does it pour off 
     the surface and wash away the fine soil. . . . The soil is always occupied 
     and is  neither dried  up by  the sun nor  leached out by  the rain,  as it 
     would be if it  were left bare. . . . This is but one of many examples that 
     might be given that should warn us to be very cautious and thorough be- 
     fore we pass judgement upon native agriculture. The whole method of 
     farming and outlook  of the farmer are so entirely new to us that we are 
     strongly tempted to call it foolish from  an instinctive conser~atism.~~ 

     Elsewhere   in the  tropical   world,  a  few astute  observers were  un- 
covering a different  agricultural  logic.  A striking example of visual order 
versus working  order  was provided  by Edgar Anderson,  on the basis of 
his  botanical   work   in  rural   Guatemala.   He  realized  that   what  ap- 
peared  to  be  overgrown,   "riotous"    dump  heaps  that  no  Westerner 
would  have  taken for  gardens  exhibited,  on  closer inspection,   an ex- 
ceptionally   efficient   and  well-thought-out    order.  Anderson  sketched 
one  of these  gardens (figures   36 and  37), and  his  description   of the 
logic  he discerned  in it  is worth  quoting  at length. 

     Though at first sight there seems little order, as soon as we started map- 
     ping the garden, we realized that it was planted in fairly  definite cross- 
     wise rows. There were fruit trees, native and European in great variety: 
     annonas, cherimoyas, avocados, peaches, quinces, plums, a fig, and a 
     few  coffeebushes. There were giant cacti grown  for their  fruit.  There 
     was a large plant  of rosemary, a plant of  rue, some poinsettias, and a 
     fine semiclimbing  tea rose. There was a whole row of the native domes- 
     ticated hawthorn,  whose fruits like yellow, doll-size apples, make a de- 

293
276  RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 














                                             [To view this image, refer to  
                                             the print version of this title.] 
                                              
                                              
                                              













                           36. Edgar Anderson's drawing of an orchard 
                           garden in Santa Lucia, Guatemala 


      licious   conserve.  There  were  two  varieties   of corn,  one  well  past  bear- 
      ing  and  now  serving   as a trellis   for  climbing    string  beans  which   were 
      just  coming   into  season,  the  other,  a  much  taller   sort,  which   was tas- 
      seling  out.  There  were  specimens   of  a little   banana  with   smooth  wide 
      leaves which   are  the  local  substitute   for  wrapping    paper,  and are  also 
      used instead   of cornhusks   in cooking   the  native  variant  of  hot tamales. 
      Over  it all  clambered   the luxuriant    vines of the  various  cucurbits.   Chay- 
      ote,  when  finally   mature,   has  a large  nutritious    root  weighing    several 
      pounds.  At one  point  there  was  a depression  the  size of a small  bathtub 
      where   a  chayote  root   had   recently   been  excavated;   this  served  as  a 
      dump  heap  and compost  for  the waste  from  the house.  At one end  of the 
      garden  was  a small  beehive  made  from  boxes  and tin  cans.  In  terms  of 
      our  American    and  European   equivalents,   the  garden  was  a vegetable 
      garden,  an orchard,   a medicinal   garden,   a dump heap,  a compost  heap, 
      and  a beeyard. There  was no problem   of erosion  though  it  was at the top 
      of  a steep slope;  the soil  surface  was  practically    all covered  and  appar- 
      ently  would   be during  most  of the  year. Humidity    would  be kept  during 
      the dry  season and  plants  of the same  sort were  so isolated  from  one an- 
      other  by intervening   vegetation   that pests and  diseases could not  readily 
      spread  from   plant  to  plant.  The  fertility    was being   conserved;  in  addi- 

294
                                                                                            Taming Nature  2 77 












                                         [To view this image, refer to  
                                         the print version of this title.] 
                                          
                                          
                                          












                     37.  In his drawing  of an orchard  garden in 
                     Santa Lucia, Anderson used glyphs that identify 
                     not only  the plants but also their general cate- 
                     gories. Circular  glyphs indicate  fruit  trees of 
                     European origin  (plum,  peach); rounded, irreg- 
                     ular  glyphs indicate fruit  trees of American ori- 
                     gin  (manzanilla). Dotted lines stand for  climb- 
                     ing vegetables, small circles for  subshrubs, 
                     large stars for  succulents, and wedge-shaped 
                     figures for  plants in the banana family. The nar- 
                     row  mass seen at the right side of figure 36 rep- 
                     resents a hedge of chichicaste, a shrub used by 
                     the Mayas. 



tion to  the waste  from  the house, mature   plants  were being  buried  in  be- 
tween the  rows  when  their  usefulness  was over. 
     It  is  frequently    said  by  Europeans    and  European   Americans    that 
time  means  nothing   to  an  Indian.    This  garden   seemed to  me  to  be  a 
good example  of how  the  Indian,   when  we look  more  than  superficially 
into  his  activities,    is budgeting    his  time   more  efficiently    than  we  do. 
The garden  was  in  continuous    production    but  was  taking   only  a little 
effort  at any  one time:  a few  weeds pulled  when  one  came down  to  pick 
the squashes,  corn  and  bean plants   dug in  between   the rows  when  the 
last of  the  climbing    beans were  picked,   and  a  new  crop  of  something 
else planted  above  them  a few  weeks later.37 

295
278 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


     Like  the  micrologic   of  the Guatemalan   garden,  the logic  of  West 
African  polycropping   systems, long  dismissed as being primitive,   has 
finally  been recognized.  In  fact, they  came under  investigation  partly 
as a reaction  against  the  many  monocropping   schemes that  miscar- 
ried.  The advantages  were often  evident  even  at the  level  of narrow 
productivist   outcomes;  and  once  other  goals  such  as sustainability, 
conservation,   and  food  security  were   considered,  their   advantages 
seemed especially striking. 
     Various  forms  of  polyculture   are the  norm  in  80  percent  of West 
Africa's farmland.38 Given what  we now know,  this should occasion  lit- 
tle surprise.  Intercropping   systems are best adapted to soils of low  fer- 
tility,  which   characterize   much   of  West Africa.  Their   use produces 
greater gains  in yield  on such soils than  on soils of high  fertility.39 One 
reason seems to be that optimal  planting  densities  are greater in inter- 
cropping  than  in monocropping,   and the  resulting  crowding  appears, 
for  reasons that  are poorly  understood  but  may  have to do  with  root 
fungi interactions,  to improve  the performance  of each cultivar. Crowd- 
ing at the  later  stage of cropping  also helps  to suppress weeds, which 
are otherwise   a major  constraint   in tropical   farming.   Since the  mix- 
ture  of  cultivars   usually   combines  grains   and legumes  (maize   and 
sorghum,  for example,  with  cowpeas and  groundnuts),  each crop  has 
complementary  nutritional    needs and rooting  systems that extract  nu- 
trients  from  different  levels in  the           In  the case of relay  cropping, 
it  appears that  the  residues  of the  first  crop  gathered  benefit  the re- 
maining  crop.  The  diversity  of  cultivars  on  the same  field  also has a 
beneficial  effect, on the health of the  crops and hence  on yields. Mixed 
crops and the scattering  of particular   cultivars  limit   the habitat  of var- 
ious pests, diseases, and weeds that  otherwise  might  build   up to dev- 
astating  proportions,   as they do on monocropped   plots.41 In fact, two 
specialists who  were very  much out  of step with  the  agronomic  estab- 
lishment  of the 1930s and 1940s went so far as to suggest that "the  sys- 
tematic  study of mixed cropping   and other native  practices  might lead 
to  comparatively   minor  modifications    in Yoruba  and  other  forms  of 
agriculture,   which   might  in  the aggregate  do  more to  increase  crop 
production   and soil  fertility   than  revolutionary   changes to green  ma- 
nuring  or mixed  farming."42 
     The multistoried   effect of polyculture   has some distinct  advantages 
for  yields  and  soil  conservation.   "Upper-story"   crops  shade  "lower- 
story"  crops, which  are selected for  their  ability  to thrive  in  the cooler 
soil  temperature   and  increased   humidity   at  ground   level.  Rainfall 
reaches the ground not directly  but  as a fine spray that is absorbed with 
less damage to  soil structure   and  less erosion. The  taller  crops  often 

296
                                                                                        Taming Nature 279 


serve as a useful  windbreak   for  the lower  crops.  Finally,  in  mixed  or 
relay  cropping,  a crop  is  in  the field  at  all times,  holding   the soil  to- 
gether and reducing  the leaching  effects that sun, wind,  and rain  exert, 
particularly   on fragile   land.  Even if polyculture   is  not to be preferred 
on the grounds  of  immediate  yield,  there is  much to  recommend  it  in 
terms of sustainability   and thus  long-term  production. 
     Our  discussion  of mixed  cropping  has thus  far  dealt only  with  the 
narrow  issues of yield and soil  conservation.  It  has overlooked the cul- 
tivators  themselves and the various  other  ends that they  seek by using 
such techniques. The most significant  advantage of intercropping,   Paul 
Richards claims,  is its great  flexibility,   "the scope [it]  offers for  a range 
of combinations  to match  individual   needs and preferences, local  con- 
ditions,  and changing circumstances  within   each season and from sea- 
son to season."43 Farmers may polycrop in  order  to avoid  labor bottle- 
necks at  planting   and at  harvest.44 Growing  many  different   crops  is 
also an obvious way to spread risks  and improve  food security. Cultiva- 
tors can reduce  the danger of going  hungry  if they sow, instead  of only 
one or two  cultivars,   crops  of long  and short  maturity,  crops  that  are 
drought   resistant   and  those that   do  well  under   wetter   conditions, 
crops with  different   patterns of  resistance to pests and diseases, crops 
that can be  stored in  the ground  with  little  loss (such  as cassava), and 
crops that  mature   in  the "hungry   time"  before  other  crops  are gath- 
ered.45 Finally, and perhaps most important,   each of these crops is em- 
bedded in a distinctive   set of social relations.  Different  members of the 
household  are likely  to  have different  rights   and responsibilities   with 
respect  to each  crop.  The planting   regimen,  in  other  words,  is  a re- 
flection  of  social  relations,  ritual   needs, and  culinary  tastes;  it  is not 
just a production   strategy  that a profit-maximizing    entrepreneur   took 
straight  out of  the pages of a text in neoclassical  economics. 
     The high-modernist   aesthetic and ideology  of most colonial  agrono- 
mists  and their  Western-trained  successors foreclosed  a dispassionate 
examination  of local  cultivation   practices, which  were  regarded as de- 
plorable  customs for  which  modern, scientific   farming  was the correc- 
tive.  A critique  of  such hegemonic  ideas comes,  if it  comes at  all, not 
from within,   but typically  from the margins,  where the intellectual  point 
of departure  and  operating  assumptions,  as was the case with  Jacobs, 
are  substantially  different.   Thus the  case for  the rationality    of mixed 
cropping  has largely come from rogue figures outside the establishment. 
      Perhaps the most striking  of these figures was Albert  Howard   (later 
Sir  Albert), an agricultural   researcher  who worked  under local  patron- 
age for more  than three decades in India.  He was known  chiefly for  the 
Indore  process, a scientific   procedure  of making  humus  from  organic 

297
280 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


wastes, and unlike most Western agronomists,  he was an avid observer 
of forest  ecology and  indigenous  practices.  Concerned  above all with 
soil fertility  and  sustainable agriculture,  Howard  observed that  the nat- 
ural diversity   of the forest  and local polycropping   practices  were both 
successful means of maintaining   or increasing  soil  health and fertility. 
Soil fertility   was a matter  of not  simply chemical  composition   but also 
structural  properties:   the soil's tilth  (or  crumb  structure),  its degree of 
aeration,  its moisture-holding   power, and the  "fungus bridge"  (the my- 
corrhizal  association)  necessary to humus creation.46 Some but  not all 
elements in this  complex  soil interaction   could be precisely  measured, 
while  others could be recognized  by a practiced  observer but  not read- 
ily measured.  Howard  undertook  elaborate experiments  in humus pro- 
duction,  soil structure,   and plant  response and was able to show field- 
trial   yield  results   superior   to  those  achieved  by  standard   Western 
practices. His  main concern,  however, was not with  how  many bushels 
of wheat  or maize could  be gotten from  an acre as with  the health  and 
quality  of the crops and  soil over the long  haul. 
     The  case for polyculture   has worked   its way  back to  the West, al- 
though it  remains one voiced by only  a tiny minority.  Rachel  Carson, in 
her revolutionary   book Silent  Spring, published  in  1962, traced the de- 
structive  use of  massive doses of  pesticides  and herbicides  to  mono- 
cropping  itself. The problem  with  insects, she explained,  resulted from 
the "devotion   of immense  acreage to a single  crop.  Such a system set 
the stage for  explosive increases  in specific  insect populations.   Single 
crop  farming  does not  take  advantage of  the principles   by which  na- 
ture works,  it  is agriculture  as an engineer might  conceive it  to be. Na- 
ture  has introduced  great variety  into  the  landscape, but man  has dis- 
played passion for  simplifying   it. . . . One important   check is a limit  on 
the amount  of suitable  habitat  for  each species."47 Just as Howard be- 
lieved that  monoculture   had contributed  to the  loss of soil fertility   and 
its corrective,   the growing  use of chemical  fertilizers   (260 pounds  per 
acre in the  United  States in 1970), so Carson argued that  monoculture 
spawned the exploding  population   of pests and its corrective,  the mas- 
sive application   of  insecticides-a      cure  that  turned  out  to be  worse 
than the  disease. 
     For these and other  reasons, there are at  least faint indications   that 
some forms  of polycropping   might  be suitable  for Western  farmers  as 
well  as                           ThisAfrican~.~~ is not the place to attempt to demonstrate the 
superiority   of polyculture   over  monoculture,  nor  am  I qualified  to  do 
so. There  is no  single,  context-free  answer  to this  issue,  for  answers 
would  depend on any number  of variables,  including  the goals sought, 
the  crops  sown, and  the  microsettings   in  which   they  were planted. 

298
                                                                                        Taming Nature 28 1 


What I have tried  to demonstrate,  however, is that polyculture,   even on 
the narrow   production-oriented     grounds  favored  by Western  agron- 
omy, merited  empirical   examination  as one among  many agricultural 
strategies. That  it was instead  dismissed summarily   by all  but a hand- 
ful of  rogue  agronomists  is a tribute   to the  power  both of  imperialist 
ideology and  of the visual  aesthetic of agricultural   high  modernism. 
     The case of  polyculture   also raises  an issue relevant  to  both  agri- 
cultural  practice   and social  structure,  an issue that  we will  ponder  at 
greater length  in the remainder   of this book: the resilience and durabil- 
ity of diversity.  Whatever  its other  virtues  or demerits,  polyculture   is a 
more stable,  more  easily sustainable  form   of agriculture   than  mono- 
cropping.  It  is more  likely  to  produce  what  economists  call Hicksian 
income:  income  that  does not undermine   factor  endowments,  which 
will  permit   that  income  flow  to continue   indefinitely   into  the  future. 
Polyculture  is, at the same time,  more supple and  adaptable. That  is, it 
is more  easily able to  absorb stress and  damage without  being  devas- 
tated. Elegant  research has recently  shown  that, at least up  to a point, 
the more cultivars  that  a given plot  has, the more productive  and  resil- 
ient it  is.49 Polyculture, as we have seen, is more resistant to the insults 
of weather  and  pests, not to  mention  more  generous  in the  improve- 
ments it  effects in  the soil.  Even if monoculture   could  be shown  to al- 
ways give  superior  yields  in  the short  run,  polyculture   might   still  be 
considered to have decisive long-term   advantage^.^^ The evidence from 
forestry  has  some  application   to  agriculture    as well:  monocropped 
forests like  those in  Germany  and  Japan have led  to ecological  prob- 
lems so severe that restoration  ecology has been called to  the rescue in 
order to  reestablish something  approaching  the earlier  diversity  (in  in- 
sects, flora, and  fauna) necessary to the  health of the  forest.51 
     Here  it is  worth  noting  the strong  parallel  between  the case for di- 
versity  in  cultivation   and  forestry  and  the case that  Jacobs made for 
diversity  in urban neighborhoods.  The more complex the neighborhood, 
she reasoned, the better it will  resist short-term   shocks in business con- 
ditions  and market  prices. Diversity,  by the same token, provides  many 
potential  growth   points  which  can benefit  from  new  opportunities.   A 
highly  specialized neighborhood,   by contrast, is like  a gambler  placing 
all  his bets on one turn  of the roulette  wheel. If  he wins,  he wins big;  if 
he loses,  he may  lose everything.   For  Jacobs, of  course, a  key point 
about  the diversity  of  a neighborhood  is the  human  ecology it  fosters. 
The  variety  of  locally  available  goods  and  services and  the  complex 
human  networks  that  it  makes possible, the  foot traffic  that  promotes 
safety, the visual  interest  that  an  animated  and  convenient  neighbor- 
hood  provides-all     interact   to make  such a location's  advantages  cu- 

299
282 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


                          Them~lative.~~ diversity and complexity that cause systems of flora to 
become more durable and resilient  work,  at another level apparently, to 
cause human communities  to become more  nimble  and satisfactory. 


Permanent Fields Versus Shifting Cultivation 

     Most West African  farmers  practiced  some form  of shifting  cultiva- 
tion.53 Variously called slash-and-burn  cultivation,  swiddening,  and ro- 
tational  bush fallow,  shifting   cultivation   involves  the temporary  culti- 
vation  of a field cleared by  cutting  and burning  most of  the vegetation. 
After  being worked   for a  few years,  the field  is abandoned  for  a new 
plot.  Eventually,  when  new  growth  has  restored  the original   field  to 
something  like its  original  fertility,   it is cultivated   again. Polycropping 
and minimum   tillage  were often  combined  with  shifting  cultivation. 
     Like  polycropping,   shifting  cultivation,   as we shall see, turns out to 
be a rational,   efficient,  and  sustainable  technique  under  the  soil, cli- 
mate,  and social conditions   where  it is  generally  practiced.  Polycrop- 
ping  and shifting  cultivation   are  almost invariably   associated. Harold 
Conklin's early, detailed,  and still  unsurpassed account of shifting  culti- 
vation in the  Philippines noted that,  for a newly cleared plot, the  average 
number  of cultivars  in a single season was between forty  and                At~ixty.5~ 
the  same time,   shifting  cultivation    is  an exceptionally   complex  and 
hence quite illegible  form of agriculture   from the perspective  of a sover- 
eign state and its  extension agents. The fields themselves are "fugitive," 
going in  and out of cultivation  at irregular   intervals-hardly     promising 
material  for a cadastral  map. The cultivators  themselves, of course, are 
often  fugitive  as well,  moving  periodically  to  be near  their  new clear- 
ings.  Registering  or  monitoring    such  populations,   let  alone  turning 
them into  easily assessable taxpayers, is a Sisyphean task.55 The project 
of the state and the agricultural   authorities,  as we saw in the Tanzanian 
case, was to replace  this  illegible  and potentially   seditious  space with 
permanent settlements and permanent  (preferably monocropped)  fields. 
     Shifting   cultivation  also gave offense to agricultural   modernizers  of 
whatever  race, because it violated  in almost  every respect their  under- 
standing  of what  modern  agriculture  had  to look like.  "Early  attitudes 
to shifting   cultivation   were almost  entirely   negative," Richards  notes. 
"It  was a bad system: exploitative,  untidy,  and                                Themi~guided."~~ finely 
adapted logic  of shifting   cultivation   depended on disturbing   the land- 
scape and ecology as little  as possible  and mimicking,   where  it could, 
many of the symbiotic  associations of local plants.  This meant that such 
fields  looked far  more  like  unimproved   nature  than  the neatly  mani- 
cured,  rectilinear   fields  that  most  agricultural   officers  were  used to. 

300
                                                                                        Taming Nature 283 


The ecological  caution  of shifting   cultivation,   in other  words,  was the 
reason behind the  appearances that so offended  development officials. 
     Rotational   bush  fallow   had  a  good many   other  advantages  that 
were rarely   appreciated.  It  upheld  the  physical  properties   of upland 
and hill  soils  which,  once destroyed,  were difficult   to  restore. The  ro- 
tation  itself,  where land  was abundant,  ensured  the long-run   stability 
of  the  practice.   Shifting   cultivators    rarely   removed  large   trees  or 
stumps-a     custom  that limited   erosion  and helped  the soil  structure 
but that struck  agricultural   officials  as sloppy and unsightly. With  some 
exceptions, swidden  plots were  cultivated  by hoe or dibble  stick rather 
than plowed.  To Westernized agronomists, it  appeared that the farmers 
were merely  "scratching   the surface"  of their  soils out  of a deplorable 
ignorance  or sloth. Where they  encountered farming  systems involving 
deep plowing  and monocropping,   they  believed they had  encountered 
a more   advanced  and  industrious   populati~n.~'The    burning    of the 
brush accumulated   in clearing  a new swidden  was also condemned  as 
wasteful.  After  a time, however,  both  shallow  cultivation   and burning 
were found  to be highly  beneficial;  the former  preserved the soil,  espe- 
cially   in  areas of  high  rainfall,    while  the  latter   reduced  pest  popu- 
lations   and  provided   valuable   nutrients   to   the  crop.   Experiments 
showed, in fact,  that burning  the brush  in the field  (rather  than hauling 
it  off) contributed   to better  yields, as did  a carefully  timed  burn.58 
     To someone trained  to a Western perspective, the total effect  of such 
cultivation   practices had  "backwardness"  written  all  over it-heaps     of 
brush  waiting   to  be burned  on  unplowed,  half-cleared   fields  littered 
with  stumps and planted  with  several interspersed crops,  none of them 
sown in straight  rows. And yet, as the hard evidence accumulated, it was 
clear that  appearances were deceiving,  even in productionist   terms. As 
Richards  concludes,  "The  proper  test for  any practice  was whether   it 
worked  in the environment  concerned, not whether  it looked 'advanced' 
or  'backward.'  Testing requires  carefully  controlled  input-output   trials. 
If  'shallow'   cultivation   on  'partially   cleared'  land gives better  returns 
relative  to the inputs  expended than rival systems, and these results can 
be sustained over time,  then the technique  is a good one, irrespective of 
whether  it was invented yesterday or a thousand years ago."59 Lost in the 
early  blanket  condemnations  of shifting  cultivation  was the  realization 
that  the practice was deployed in a highly discriminating   way by African 
cultivators.   Most farmers  combined permanent  bottomland   cultivation 
of  some kind with  swidden  cultivation  of  the more fragile  hillsides,  up- 
lands,  or forests.  Rather than  not knowing   any better, as was often  as- 
sumed, most  shifting cultivators   were familiar  with  a range of cropping 
techniques  among which  they selected with care. 

301
284 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


Fertilizer Versus Fertility 

    The best fertilizer on any farm is the footsteps of the owner. 
     -Confucius 

     Commercial   fertilizers  have  often been touted  as magical  inocula- 
tions for  improving  poor  soils and raising yields;  extension agents have 
routinely  referred  to fertilizers   and pesticides  as medicine  for the soil. 
The actual  results  have often been  disappointing.   Two major  reasons 
for the disappointment   are  directly  relevant  to our  larger argument. 
     First,  recommendations    for  fertilizer    applications   are  inevitably 
gross simplifications.   Their applicability   to  any particular  field  is ques- 
tionable,  since a map  of soil classes is likely  to  overlook  an enormous 
degree of  microvariation    between  and  within   fields.  The  conditions 
under which  fertilizers   are applied, the  "dosage," the soil structure,  the 
crops for  which  they are intended,  and the  weather immediately   prior 
and subsequent to  their  application   can all  greatly influence  their  up- 
take  and effect.  As Richards   observes, the  unavoidable   variation   by 
farm and field  "requires a more open-ended approach,  with,  in all prob- 
ability,   farmers   doing  much   of  the  necessary  experimentation    for 
themsel~es."~~ 
     Second,  fertilizer   formulas   suffer from   an analytical   narrowness. 
The formulas  themselves  derive  from  the  work  of a remarkable   Ger- 
man scientist,  Justus Freiherr  von Liebig,  who, in  a classic manuscript 
published  in  1840,  identified  the  main  chemical  nutrients   present  in 
the soil and to  whom we still  owe the current   standard fertilizer   recipe 
(N,  P, K). It  was a brilliant    scientific   advance, with   far-reaching  and 
usually beneficial  results.  Where it tended  to get into trouble,  however, 
was when  it  posed as "imperial"    knowledge-when      it  was touted  as 
the way in  which  all  soil deficiencies  could  be remedied.61 As Howard 
and others have painstakingly   shown,  there are a range of  intervening 
variables-including       the physical  structure  of the  soil, aeration,  tilth, 
humus,  and the fungus  bridge-that      greatly  influence  plant  nutrition 
and soil fertility.62 Chemical  fertilizers  can in fact so thoroughly  oxidize 
beneficial  organic   matter  as to  destroy  its crumb  structure   and  con- 
tribute  to a progressive  alkalization   and a loss of fertilit~.~3 
     The details  are less important  than the larger  point:  an effective soil 
science must  not  stop  at chemical   nutrients;  it  must  encompass  ele- 
ments of physics,  bacteriology,  entomology, and  geology, and that is at 
a minimum.   Ideally,  then, a practical   approach  to fertilizers   requires, 
simultaneously,  a general, interdisciplinary    knowledge,  which  a single 
specialist  is  unlikely   to have,  and  attention   to the  particularity    of  a 
given  field, which   only the  farmer   is likely  to  have. A procedure  that 

302
                                                                                        Taming Nature 285 


blends a purely  chemical   nutrient  perspective   with  soil  classification 
grids and  that leaves the particular   field far  behind  is a recipe for  inef- 
fectiveness or even disaster. 


A History of "Unauthorized" Innovation 

     For  most  colonial   officials   and  their  successors,  high-modernist 
commitments  led  them to  form  inaccurate  assumptions  about indige- 
nous agriculture    and blinded   them  to its  dynamism.   Far from  being 
timeless, static,  and rigid,  indigenous  agricultural   practices  were con- 
stantly being  revised and adapted.  Some of this plasticity  was part  of a 
broad repertoire   of techniques  that could  be adjusted,  for example,  to 
different  patterns  of rainfall,   soils,  pitches of  land, market  opportuni- 
ties, and labor supplies. Most African  cultivators  were typically  utilizing 
more than  one cultivation   technique  during  a  season and knew many 
more that  might come in  handy. When entirely  novel cultivars  from  the 
New World  became  available, they  were adopted  with  alacrity   where 
appropriate.  Thus maize, cassava, potatoes, chiles, and a variety of New 
World  pulses and gourds  were incorporated   into  many  African  plant- 
ing regimens.64 
     The history  of "on-farm"  experimentation,   selection, and adaptation 
was, of course,  a very old  story  indeed, both  in  Africa  and elsewhere. 
Ethnobotany  and  paleobotany  have been able to trace  in some histor- 
ical  detail  how   hybrids  and  variants   of, for   example,  the  main  Old 
World  grains or  New World  maize were  selected and propagated  for a 
host of  different  uses and  growing  conditions.   The same  observation 
holds  true for  those plants  that  are vegetatively  propagated-that       is, 
propagated  by cuttings  rather  than by seeds.65 
     On  a strictly  dispassionate  view, more  specialists  would  have con- 
cluded  that  there  were  many  grounds  for  considering   every African 
farm  as something  of  a small-scale  experimental  station.   It  stands to 
reason that  any community   of cultivators   who must  wrest  their  living 
from  a  stingy  and variable   environment   will  rarely   overlook  the  op- 
portunity   to improve  their  security  and food supply. The limits   to local 
knowledge  must also be emphasized. Indigenous cultivators  knew  their 
own  environment   and  its  possibilities   remarkably   well.   But  they  of 
course lacked  the knowledge  that  such tools of  modern  science as the 
microscope,   aerial  photography,  and  scientific   plant  breeding   could 
provide.  They often lacked, as did many cultivators  elsewhere, the tech- 
nology  or  the access to technology   that make,  say, large-scale  irriga- 
tion  schemes and highly   mechanized  agriculture   possible.  Like peas- 
ants in  the Mediterranean   Basin,  China, and India,   they were capable 

303
286 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


of damaging their  ecosystem, even if low population   densities had thus 
far spared  them  from  making  this  mistake.66 But if  most agricultural 
specialists had appreciated how  much the indigenous  farmer  did know, 
had appreciated  her practical,  experimental  temper  and willingness  to 
adopt new crops  and techniques  when they  met local needs, such spe- 
cialists would  have concluded, with  Robert Chambers, that  "indigenous 
agricultural  knowledge,  despite being ignored  or overridden  by consul- 
tant experts, is the single  largest knowledge  resource not yet mobilized 
in the development  enterpri~e."~~ 


The Institutional     Affinities    of High-Modernist     Agriculture 

The willful   disdain  for  local  competence  shown  by most  agricultural 
specialists was  not,  I believe,  simply   a case of prejudice   (of the  edu- 
cated, urban, and Westernized elite  toward the peasantry)  or of the aes- 
thetic  commitments   implicit   in  high modernism.   Rather,  official  atti- 
tudes were also a matter of institutional   privilege. To the degree that the 
cultivators'   practices  were  presumed  reasonable  until  proven  other- 
wise, to the degree that specialists might learn  as much from the farmer 
as vice versa, and  to the  degree that  specialists had  to negotiate  with 
farmers as political  equals, would the basic premise behind  the officials' 
institutional   status and power  be undermined.  The unspoken  logic be- 
hind most of the state projects  of agricultural  modernization   was one of 
consolidating  the power  of central  institutions  and diminishing   the au- 
tonomy of cultivators  and their  communities  vis-a-vis those institutions. 
Every  new material   practice  altered  in  some  way the  existing  distri- 
bution  of  power,  wealth,  and  status; and  the  agricultural   specialists' 
claims to  be neutral  technicians  with  no institutional    stake in the  out- 
come can hardly  be accepted at face value.68 
     The centralizing    effects of  Soviet  collectivization   and  ujamaa  vil- 
lages were perfectly  obvious.  So are those of large  irrigation   projects, 
where authorities   decide when  to release the  water, how  to distribute 
it, and what  water  fees to charge, or of agricultural   plantations,   where 
the workforce  is supervised  as if it were in  a factory setting.69 For colo- 
nialized  farmers,  the effect  of such centralization   and  expertise was a 
radical  de-skilling  of the cultivators   themselves. Even in  the context of 
family  farms  and a liberal  economy, this  was in  fact the utopian  pros- 
pect held  up by  Liberty  Hyde  Bailey, a  plant  breeder, apostle  of agri- 
cultural   science, and  the  chairman  of  the  Country  Life  Commission 
under Theodore  Roosevelt. Bailey  declared, "There  will  be established 
in the open  country  plant  doctors,  plant  breeders, soil  experts, health 

304
                                                                                Taming Nature 287 

experts, pruning and spraying experts, forest experts, recreation ex- 
perts, market experts, . . . [and] housekeeping experts, . . . [all of whom 
are ] needed for the purpose of giving special advice and dire~tion."~~ 
Bailey's future was one organized almost entirely  by a  managerial 
elite: "Yet we are not to think of society as founded wholly on small 
separate tracts, of 'family farms,' occupied by persons who live merely 
in contentment; this would mean that all  landsmen would be essen- 
tially laborers. We need to hold on the land many persons who possess 
large powers of organization, who are managers, who can handle af- 
fairs in a bold way: it would be fatal to the best social and spiritual re- 
sults if such persons could find no adequate opportunities on the land 
and were forced into other  occupation^."^^ 
     In spite of these hopeful pronouncements and intentions, if one ex- 
amines carefully many of the agricultural innovations of the twentieth 
century -innovations  that seemed purely technical and hence neutral 
-one   cannot but conclude that many of them created commercial and 
political  monopolies that inevitably diminished the autonomy of the 
farmer. The revolution in hybrid seeds, particularly corn, had this ef- 
          Since hybrids are either sterile or do not breed "true," the seed 
company that has bred the parents of the hybrid-cross has valuable 
property in hybrid seed, which it can sell every year, unlike the open- 
pollinated varieties which the farmer can select him~elf.'~ 
     A similar but  not identical centralizing  logic applied to the high- 
yielding varieties (HYVS)of wheat, rice, and maize developed over the 
past thirty years. Their enormous impact on yields (an impact that var- 
ied widely by crop and growing conditions) depended on combining a 
massive response to nitrogen application with short, tough stalks that 
prevented lodging. Realizing their potential yield required abundant 
water (usually via irrigation), large applications of commercial fertil- 
izer, and the periodic application of pesticides. Mechanization of field 
preparation and harvesting was also promoted. As with hybrids, the 
lack of biological diversity in the fields meant that each generation of 
HYVS was likely to succumb to infestations of fungus, rust, or insects, 
necessitating the purchase of new seeds and new pesticides (as the in- 
sects built up resistance). The resulting biological arms race, which 
plant breeders and chemists believe that they can continue to win, is 
one that puts the cultivator increasingly in the hands of public and pri- 
vate specialists. As with the truly democratic aspects of Nyerere's poli- 
cies, those elements of research and policy that might threaten the po- 
sition of a managerial elite tended either not to be explored at all or, if 
explored, to be "selected against" in policy implementation. 

305
288 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


The Simplifying    Assumptions    of Agricultural     Science 

    This attempt at total control is an invitation to disorder. And the rule seems to 
    be that the more rigid  and exclusive is the specialist's boundary, and the 
    stricter the control within it, the more disorder rages around it. One can take 
    a greenhouse and grow summer vegetables in the wintertime, but in doing so 
    one creates a vulnerability to the weather and to the possibility of failure 
    where none existed before. The control by which a tomato plant lives through 
    January is much more problematic than the natural order by which an oak 
    tree or a titmouse lives through January. 
     -Wendell  Berry, The Unsettling ofAmerica 

Most  of the  elements  of  state development   programs  have  not been 
merely the whims  of powerful  elites. Even villagization   in Tanzania had 
long  been  the  subject  of  apparently   sound  agroeconomic   analysis. 
Schemes for  the  introduction    of such  new  crops as cotton,   tobacco, 
groundnuts,   and rice  as well   as plans for  mechanization,    irrigation, 
and fertilizer   regimens had been preceded by lengthy  technical  studies 
and field  trials.  Why, then, have such a large  number of  these schemes 
failed  to deliver  anything  like  the results  foreseen for  them? A closely 
related  question, which   we will  address in  the next  chapter, is why  so 
many successful changes in agricultural   practices and production   have 
been pioneered,  not  by the  state, but  by the  autonomous  initiative   of 
cultivators  themselves. 


The Isolation of Experimental Variables 

     The record  shows, it seems to me, that a substantial part of the prob- 
lem lies  in the  systematic and  necessary limitations   of scientific   work 
whenever the ultimate  purpose  of that  work  is practical   adoption  by a 
diverse  set of practitioners    working   in  a large  variety  of  conditions. 
That is, some of the  problems  lie deeper than  the institutional   tempta- 
tions to  central  control,  the pathologies  of  administration,   or the  pen- 
chant for  aesthetically  satisfying  but uneconomic   show projects.  Even 
under  the best  of circumstances,   the  laboratory  results  and  the data 
from  the  experimental   plots  of  research  stations  are a  long  country 
mile  from the  human  and natural  environments  where  they must  ulti- 
mately find  a home. 
     The  normal  procedure   in scientific   agricultural    research  has his- 
torically  been to focus  almost exclusively  on crop-by-crop  experiments 
designed to  test the impact  of  variations  in  inputs  on yields.  More  re- 
cently,  other  variables  have  come under   scrutiny.  Thus  experiments 
might  test yields under  different  soil and moisture  conditions   or deter- 
mine  which  hybrids   resisted lodging   or  ripened  in  a way  that facili- 

306
                                                                                        Taming Nature 289 


tated machine  harvesting.   Ecologically   conscious  research has  often 
proceeded in  the same  fashion:  by isolating   one by one the  variables 
that might  contribute,   say, to biological  resistance  of a certain  variety 
of fruit  to a particular   pest. 
     The isolation   of a very few  variables-ideally      just  two,  while  con- 
trolling   all others-is     a key tenet  of experimental   science.74 As a pro- 
cedure,  it is  both  valuable  and necessary  to scientific   work.  Only  by 
radically  simplifying   the  experimental  situation   is it  possible to  guar- 
antee unambiguous,  verifiable,  impersonal,  and  universal  results75 As 
a pioneer in chaos theory  has put it:  "There is a fundamental  presump- 
tion in  physics that  the way you understand  the world   is that you  keep 
isolating  its ingredients  until you  understand the stuff  you think  is truly 
fundamental.  Then you presume that  the other  things you don't  under- 
stand are details.  The assumption   is that there  are  a small number  of 
principles  that you can discern by looking  at things in their  pure state- 
this is the truly   analytic  notion-and     somehow  you put these together 
in  some more  complicated   ways when  you  want  to  solve more  dirty 
problems.  If  you  can."76 In agricultural    research,  controlling    for  all 
possible variables  except those  under  experimental  scrutiny   required 
normalizing  assumptions  about such things  as weather, soils, and land- 
scapes, not to mention  normalizing   assumptions,  often implicit,   about 
farm  size, labor  availability,   and the  desires of  cultivators.   "Test-tube 
research," of course, most  closely approximated  the ideal  of controls.77 
Even the experimental  plot  on a research station,  however, was itself  a 
radical   simplification.    It  maximized   the degree  of control   "within    a 
small  and highly  simplified   enclosure"  and ignored  the rest, leaving  it 
"totally  out  of control."78 
     It   is  easy to  see how  monoculture   and  attention   to  quantitative 
yields would   fit most  comfortably  within   this  paradigm.  Monoculture 
eliminates  all  other  cultivars  that  might  complicate   the design,  while 
concern  with  quantitative  yields avoids  the thorny  measurement prob- 
lems that would  arise  if a particular   quality  or taste were the objective. 
The  science of  forestry  is  easiest when  one  is interested   only  in  the 
commercial   wood from  a single species of tree. The science of agricul- 
ture  is easiest when it  is a question of  the most efficient  way  of getting 
as many  bushels as possible  of  one hybrid  of  maize  from  a "normal- 
ized"  acre. 
      A progressive loss of experimental   control  occurs  when one moves 
from   the laboratory   to  the  research plot   on an  experimental   station 
and then  to field trials  on actual  farms. Richards  notes the unease such 
a move  aroused among  researchers in  West Africa, who  were  anxious 
about  making  their  research  more  practical  yet  concerned  about any 

307
290 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


relaxing of  experimental  conditions.  After discussing how the  farms se- 
lected for trials  ought  to be relatively  homogeneous so that they  would 
respond in  uniform   ways to the experimental   results,  the researchers 
went on to  lament the experimental   control  that they  they lost by leav- 
ing the  research station.   "It  may be difficult,"   they wrote,   "to plant  at 
all locations  within  a few days and almost impossible  to find farm  plots 
of uniform   soil." They continued,   "Other  types of interference, such  as 
pest attacks or  bad weather,  may affect  some treatments  and not  oth- 
er~.'''~This  is, Richards explains, a "salutary reminder  of one of the rea- 
sons why 'formal'   scientific  research  procedures  on experimental  sta- 
tions, with  the  stress on controlling  all  variables except  the one or two 
under direct  investigation,  'miss the point'  as far as many small-holders 
are concerned. The main  concern  of farmers  is how to cope with  these 
complex interactions  and unscheduled events. From the scientist's point 
of view (particularly   in relation to the need to secure clear-cut results for 
publication),  on-farm  experimentation  poses a tough challenge."80 
     To the extent that  science is obliged to deal  simultaneously  with  the 
complex  interactions  of many variables,  it begins to  lose the very char- 
acteristics  that distinguish  it  as modern science. Nor  does the accumu- 
lation  of many  narrow  experimental   studies add up  to the same thing 
as a single study  of such complexity.  This  is not,  I must  repeat, a case 
against the experimental  techniques  of modern scientific  research. Any 
extensive, on-farm  research study that did  not reduce the complexity  of 
interactions   might  be able to show,  as farmers can,  that a set of  prac- 
tices produced  "good results":  say, high yields. But  it would  not be able 
to isolate  the key factors  responsible for  this result.  The case that I  am 
making   instead  recognizes  the power   and  utility   of  scientific  work, 
within   its  domain,  and  recognizes its  limitations    in dealing  with   the 
kinds  of problems  for which  its  techniques are ill  suited. 


Blind  Spots 

      Returning  once  again  to the  case of polyculture,   we  can see why 
agronomists  might  have scientific  as well as aesthetic and institutional 
grounds  for  opposing  polycropping.   Complex  forms of  intercropping 
introduce   too  many  variables  into  simultaneous   play  to  offer  much 
chance  of  unambiguous   experimental   proof  of  causal  relations.  We 
know  that certain polycultural   techniques, particularly  those combining 
nitrogen-fixing   legumes with  grains, are quite productive,  but  we know 
little  about the precise interactions  that  bring  about these results.S1 And 
we  find problems   in teasing  out causation  even when  we confine  our 
attention  to the single  dependent variable  of quantitative  yields.8*If  we 

308
                                                                                        Taming Nature 29 1 


relax this  restriction   of  focus and  begin to  consider  a wider  range  of 
dependent variables  (outcomes), such as soil fertility,  interactions   with 
livestock  (fodder,  manuring),   compatibility   with   family  labor  supply, 
and so on, the difficulties   of comparison  rapidly  become intractable   to 
scientific  method. 
     The nature  of  the scientific   problem  here is  strongly  analogous  to 
that of  complexity  in  physical  systems. The elegantly simple  formulas 
of Newton's  laws of mechanics  make it  relatively  easy to calculate  the 
orbits  of two  heavenly  bodies  once we know  their   respective  masses 
and the distance  between them.  Add one more body, however,  and the 
calculation   of orbits  resulting  from  the  interaction   becomes far more 
complex.  When there  are ten bodies  interacting   (this  is the simplified 
version of our  solar system),83 no orbits ever exactly repeat themselves, 
and there  is  no way  to  predict  the  long-term   state of  the system.  As 
each new variable  is introduced,  the  number of  ramifying  interactions 
to be taken into  account  grows geometrically. 
     It  does not stretch  the  facts too  far, I think,   to claim  that  scientific 
agricultural    research  has an  elective  affinity   with  agricultural    tech- 
niques that  lie  within   reach of  its powerful   methods.  Maximizing   the 
yields of pure-stand  crops is one technique where its power  can be used 
to best advantage. Insofar as its institutional   power has permitted,  agri- 
cultural  agencies, like  scientific  foresters, have tended to simplify   their 
environments  in  ways that  make them more  amenable to  their  system 
of knowledge.  The  forms of  agriculture   that  conformed  to their   mod- 
ernist  aesthetic  and  their   politico-administrative     interests  also  hap- 
pened  to  fit  securely  within   the  perimeter   of their   professional   sci- 
entific  vocation.84 
     What  of the "disorder"  outside the realm of the experimental  design? 
Extra-experimental   interactions  can  in fact prove  beneficial when  they 
strengthen  the  desired  effect.85 There is no a priori   reason for  antici- 
pating  what  their   effects might  be; what  is  significant   is that  they lie 
wholly  outside  the experimental  model. 
     Occasionally,  however,  these effects have been both important   and 
potentially   threatening.    A striking   example  from   the years  between 
 1947 and 1960 was the massive, worldwide   use of pesticides, the most 
infamous  of which   was DDT. DDT was sprayed to kill mosquito popula- 
tions  and  thereby  reduce the  many  diseases that the pests carry.  The 
experimental   model  was  largely  confined  to  determining   the dosage 
concentrations    and  application   conditions   required   for  eradicating 
mosquito   populations.   Within   its field  of  vision,  the  model  was suc- 
cessful; DDT did kill mosquitos  and dramatically   reduced the  incidence 
of  endemic malaria   and other  diseases.S6 It also had, as we slowly be- 

309
292 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


came aware, devastating  ecological effects,  as residues were absorbed 
by organisms all  along the  food chain,  of which  humans  are of course 
also a part. The consequences of the use of DDT and other pesticides on 
soil, water, fish, insects, birds,  and fauna were so intricate  that  we have 
not yet gotten to  the bottom  of them. 


Weak Peripheral Vision 

     Part of  the problem  was that  the side effects were  constantly  rami- 
tying. A first-order   effect-say,    the decline  or disappearance  of a local 
insect population-led      to changes in flowering   plants, which  changed 
the habitat  for other  plants and for  rodents,  and so on. Another part  of 
the problem  was that the effects of pesticides on  other species were ex- 
amined only  under experimental   conditions.  Yet the application  of DDT 
was under  field conditions,   and as Carson  pointed  out,  scientists had 
no idea what  the interactive  effects  of pesticides were  when they were 
mixed with  water  and soil  and acted upon  by sunlight. 
     That  awareness of these interaction    effects came from  outside  the 
scientific  paradigm  itself  is both interesting   and, I think,  diagnostic.  It 
began, in  particular,   when  people gradually   came to  realize  that  the 
songbird  population   had  suffered  a radical   decline.  Public  alarm   at 
what  was not happening  anymore  outside  their  kitchen  windows  led, 
eventually  (through  scientific   research),  to a tracing   of how  DDT con- 
centrations  in the organs of birds  led to fragile  eggshells and reproduc- 
tive failure.   This finding   in turn  stimulated   a host of  related inquiries 
into  the effects of  pesticides and  ultimately   to legislation  banning   the 
use of DDT.In  this case, as in  others, the  power  of the scientific   para- 
digm  was achieved partly   by its exclusion  of  extra-experimental   vari- 
ables that have often  circled  back, as it were,  to take their  revenge. 
     The logic  of agroeconomic analysis  of farming  efficiency and profits 
also wins its power  by a comparable  restriction  of  the field of focus. Its 
tools are  used to best advantage in  examining  the  microeconomics   of 
the farm as a firm.  On the basis of its necessary simplifying assumptions 
about factor   costs, inputs, weather,  labor  use, and prices,  it  can show 
how profitable   or  unprofitable   it might  be to  use a particular   piece of 
machinery,  to  buy  irrigation   equipment,   or  to  raise one  crop  rather 
than another.  Studies of this kind  and also of marketing   have tended to 
demonstrate  the  economies of  scale achievable  by large,  highly  capi- 
talized,  and  highly  mechanized  operations.  Outside  this  narrow  per- 
spective are hundreds of considerations   that are necessarily bracketed, 
in  a manner similar   to that  used in experimental   science. But here,  in 
agroeconomic  analysis, the  human agents adopting  this  view have the 

310
                                                                                        Taming Nature 293 


political  capacity, in the short  run at least, to make certain  that they  are 
not held  economically   responsible  for  the  larger   "extra-firm"   conse- 
quences of their  logic.  The pattern  in  agriculture   in the United   States 
was clearly   outlined  by  a rogue  economist  testifying   to  Congress in 
1972. 

     Only in the past decade has serious attention been given to the fact that 
     the large agricultural  firm is  . . . able to achieve benefits by externaliz- 
     ing certain costs. The disadvantages of large scale operation fall largely 
     outside the decision-making framework  of  the large farm  firm.  Prob- 
     lems of waste disposal, pollution control, added burdens on public ser- 
     vice, deterioration   of rural   social structures,  impairment   of the  tax 
     base, and the political  consequences of a concentration  of economic 
     power have typically not been considered as costs of large scale, by the 
     firm. They are unquestionably costs to the larger community. 
          In theory, large scale operation should enable the firm to bring a wide 
     range of  both costs and  benefits within  its  internal  decision-making 
     framework.  In practice the economic and political  power that  accom- 
     panies large scale provides  constant temptation  to  the large  firm  to 
     take the benefits and pass on the costs.87 

In other  words, although  the business analysts of the agricultural   firms 
have weak peripheral  vision,  the political  clout  that such firms  possess 
both individually  and collectively  can help them  avoid being blindsided. 


Shortsightedness 

     Nearly  all  studies  purporting    to  evaluate decisions   of interest   to 
farmers are experiments  that last  one or at most a few seasons. Implic- 
itly, the logic  behind  a research design of this  kind  is that the  long-run 
effects will   not contradict   the  short-run  findings.  The  question  of the 
time  horizon  of  research is  directly  relevant  even  to those for  whom 
the maximization   of yields is the holy  grail. Unless they  are exclusively 
interested in  immediate yields,  no matter what  the consequences, their 
attention  must be directed  to the  issue of sustainability   or to  Hicksian 
income.  Perhaps the most significant   practical  division  is thus  not be- 
tween those  who  would  design  agricultural   policy   with  cultural   and 
social goals  in mind  (such  as the preservation  of  the family  farm,  the 
landscape, or  diversity)  and  those who  want to  maximize  production 
and profit,   but  rather  between  productionists   with   a short  view  and 
productionists   with  a long  view.  After all,  concern  about  soil  erosion 
and water  supply  was motivated  less often  by regard  for  the environ- 
ment than  by regard  for the sustainability   of current  production. 
     The relatively   short-run   orientation   of crop  studies  and farm  eco- 
nomics works  to  exclude even those long-run   results of interest  to  the 

311
294 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


productionists.  Many  of the claims  for polyculture,   for example,  assert 
its superiority    over the  long  haul  as a system of  production.   A poly- 
cropping  trial   of twenty  or  more  years, as Stephen  Marglin   has sug- 
gested, might   well   reach  conclusions   that  are  quite  different   from 
those derived from  a trial  that lasts a season or two.88 It is not at all im- 
plausible that  the process of open pollination   and selection by farmers, 
as opposed to  hybridization,   might  have  developed cultivars   roughly 
equal in  yield  to the best hybrids  and  superior  to them  in  many other 
respects, including  Thepr~fitability.~~  paper profits  of scientific,  mono- 
cropped forests, we  now realize,  were achieved at considerable  cost to 
the long-term   health  and  productivity   of  the forest.  One would   have 
supposed that  since  most  farms  are  family  enterprises,  there  would 
have been more  studies of  cropping  and  firm  economics  that  took as 
their  analytical  unit  of time the entire  family  cycle  of one generati~n.~~ 
     Nothing  in  the logic  of the scientific   method itself  seems to require 
that a short-run  perspective prevail;  rather, such a perspective seems to 
be a response to  institutional   and  perhaps commercial   pressures. On 
the other hand, the need to isolate a few variables while assuming every- 
thing  else constant   and the  bracketing   of interaction    effects that  lie 
outside the  experimental  model  are very  definitely  inscribed  in  scien- 
tific  method. They  are a condition  of the  formidable  clarity  it  achieves 
within  its  field of vision.  Taken together, the  parts of the  landscape oc- 
cluded  by actual   scientific  practice-the      blind   spots,  the periphery, 
and the  long  view-also      constitute  a  formidable  portion   of  the  real 
world. 


The Simplifying     Practice  of  Scientific   Agriculture 

Some Yields Are More Equal Than Others 

     Modern  agricultural    research commonly   proceeds as if yields,  per 
unit  of scarce  inputs,  were the  central  concern  of the farmer.  The as- 
sumption  is enormously  convenient;   like the  commercial  wood  of sci- 
entific  forestry,  the  generic,  homologous,  uniform   commodities   thus 
derived  create  the  possibility   both   of  quantitative   comparisons   be- 
tween the yield  of different  cultivation  techniques  and of aggregate sta- 
tistics.  The familiar   tabulations   of acres planted,  yields  per acre,  and 
total  production  from  year  to year are usually  the decisive  measure of 
success in a development program. 
     But  the premise that all rice,  all corn, and all millet  are "equal," how- 
ever useful, is simply  not a plausible  assumption about  any crop unless 
it  is purely  a commodity   for  sale in the  market.91 Each subspecies of 
grain has distinctive  properties,   not just in how  it grows but  in its qual- 

312
                                                                                        Taming Nature 295 


ities as a grain  once  harvested.  In  some cultures,  certain  varieties   of 
rice are  grown  for  use in certain   distinctive  dishes;  other varieties   of 
rice may  be used only for  specific  ritual  purposes or  in the  settlement 
of local debts.  Some of the complex  considerations  that  go into distin- 
guishing  one rice  from   another  in  terms  of their   cooking  properties 
alone can be appreciated  from  Richards's  observations about  how  the 
considerations  are weighed  in Sierra  Leone. 

     A phrase like "it cooks badly" is often a catch-all for a range of proper- 
     ties connected with storage, preparation and consumption,  going well 
     beyond subjective questions of "taste." Is  the variety concerned  well- 
     adapted to  local   food processing  techniques?  Is  it  readily  peeled, 
     milled,  and pounded?  How  much water  and  fuel does it  require  in 
     cooking? How  long does it  keep, prior  to cooking  and once cooked? 
     Mende women claim that  improved swamp rices are much less palat- 
     able than  the harder  "upland"  rices  when served up  a second time. 
     With the  right  kind  of rice,  it  is possible to cut  down the  number  of 
     times it  is necessary to cook during  busy periods  on the farm.  Since 
     cooking sometimes takes up to 3-4  hours per day (including  the time 
     taken to husk rice, prepare a fire and collect water) this is a factor of no 
     small importance when labour  is short.92 

     So  far,  we  have  considered   only  the  husked  grain.   What  if   we 
broaden our  view  to take  in the  rest of the  plant?  At once we  see that 
there  is a great  deal more  to  be harvested  from  a plant  than  its  seed 
grains. Thus a Central  American  peasant may not be interested  only  in 
the number  and size of the corn kernels she harvested. She may also be 
interested  in using the cobs for fodder  and scrub brushes; the  husk and 
leaves for wrappers,   thatch,  and fodder;  and  the stalks as trellises  for 
climbing   beans,  as fodder,  and  as temporary   fencing.   The fact  that 
Central  American  farmers know  of many more  maize varieties  than do 
their  counterparts   in  the  Corn Belt  of  the  United  States is  partly  re- 
lated to the  uses to which different  varieties  are put. Maize may  also be 
sold in the market  for any of these purposes and thus prized for qualities 
other than  its kernels. The same story could, of course, be told about vir- 
tually  any widely  grown  cultivar.  Its  various  parts from  various  stages 
of growth  may come in  handy as twine, vegetable dyes, medicinal poul- 
tices,  greens to  eat  raw  or  to cook,  packaging  material,   bedding,  or 
items for  ritual  or  decorative  purposes. 
      Even from  a commercial  point  of view, then, the plant  is not simply 
its grain.  Nor  are all  grains of  all subspecies and hybrids  of maize  and 
rice  equal.  The yield  of  seeds by weight  or  volume  may therefore   be 
only  one of many ends-and    perhaps not the  most important  one-for 
a cultivator.   But once scientific  agriculture   or plant  breeding  begins to 
introduce   this enormous  range of  value and uses into  its own  calcula- 

313
296 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


tions, it  is once  again in  the  Newtonian  dilemma   of the  ten heavenly 
bodies. And even if it  were able to represent  some of this complexity  in 
its models, these usages are subject to change  without  notice. 


Experimental Plots Versus Actual Fields 

     All environments,   as we noted earlier, are intractably   local. There is 
always what  we  might  call the  translation   problem  in  converting  the 
generic,  standardized  High   Church  Latin  which  emanates  from  labs 
and experimental  stations into  the vernacular  of the local  parish.  Stan- 
dardized  solutions  to field  preparation,   planting  schedules, and fertil- 
izer requirements  always have to be adjusted  when they are applied to, 
say, a stony,  low-lying,   north-facing   field  which   has just  grown   two 
crops of oats. Agricultural   scientists  at research stations  and extension 
agents are  very much  aware  of  this  translation   problem,  as are  spe- 
cialists  in any applied  science. The question  is always how  to discover 
and convey findings   so that they will   be helpful  to farmers.  As long as 
the findings  or  solutions  are not  simply  imposed, the farmer   must de- 
cide if  they meet his needs. 
     Like   cadastral   maps,  the  experimental   plots   of  agricultural    re- 
search stations  cannot  begin to represent  the  diversity  and variability 
of farmers' fields. The researchers must operate on the basis of standard, 
normal-range  assumptions  about soil, field  preparation,  weeding, rain- 
fall,  temperature,   and so on,  whereas  each farmer's  field  is a unique 
concatenation  of circumstances, actions,  and events, some of which are 
knowable  in  advance (soil composition)   and some of  which  are out of 
anyone's hands (the weather).  The interactions  among  these and other 
variables  are at least as important  as the status of each; thus the effects 
of  an early  monsoon  on rocky  soil  that has just  been weeded  are dif- 
ferent  from  those  of an early  monsoon  on waterlogged   land  that  has 
not been weeded. 
      The averages and normalizations  of experimental  work  obscure the 
fact  that an  average weather year  or a standard  soil is  a statistical  fic- 
tion.  As Wendell Berry  puts it: 

     The  industrial  version  of  agriculture  has it  that  farming  brings  the 
     farmer  annually, over and over again, to the same series of problems, to 
     each one of which  there is always the same generalized solution, and 
     therefore,  that industry's solution  can be simply and safely substituted 
     for  his solution. But  that is false. On a good farm, because of weather 
     and other so-called variables, neither the annual series of problems nor 
     any of the problems individually   is ever quite the same two years run- 
     ning.  The good farmer (like the artist, the quarterback,  the statesman) 

314
                                                                                        Taming Nature 297 


     must be  master of  many  possible solutions,  one  of which   he must 
     choose under pressure and apply  with  skill  in  the right  place  at the 
    right  time.93 

Soil,  although   it  is  not  as  capriciously   variable   day  by  day  as the 
weather, is often exceptionally variable  within  the same field. The essen- 
tial  simplifications    of agricultural    science  require,  first,   that  soil  be 
sorted into a small  number of  categories based on acidity, nitrogen  lev- 
els, and other qualities.  For analyzing the soil  of a single field, the prac- 
tice is to  gather bits  of soil  from  several parts  of the field  and to  com- 
bine them  in  the  sample  to  be analyzed  so that   it  will  represent   an 
average. This procedure implicitly    recognizes the substantial  variation 
in soil  quality  over a given  field.  The recommended  fertilizer   applica- 
tion may  therefore  not be right  for  any part  of the field,  but compared 
to applications  derived  from  other formulas,  it  will  be "less wrong," on 
average, for the field  as a whole. Once again, Berry  cautions us against 
these generalizations: "Most farms,  even most fields, are made up of dif- 
ferent kinds  of soil  patterns and  soil sense. Good farmers  have always 
known this  and have used the land accordingly;   they have been careful 
students of the natural  vegetation,  soil  depth, and structure,   slope and 
drainage. They are not appliers  of generalizations,  theoretical   or meth- 
odological  or me~hanical."~~When,  to the complexity   and variation   of 
the soil conditions,  we add  the practice  of polyculture,  the  obstacles to 
a successful application   of  a general formula   become virtually   insur- 
mountable. The knowledge  we do have of the limits  on some plants' tol- 
erance of temperature  and moisture  does not ensure that they will  nec- 
essarily thrive  within   these limits.  The typical  plant  is "awfully   finicky 
about just where  and when  it will  grow, under  exactly what  conditions 
it will   germinate," as Edgar  Anderson explains.  "The vastly more  intri- 
cate business of which   plants they  will  and will   not tolerate   as neigh- 
bors and under  what  conditions,  has never  been looked into  except in 
a preliminary   way for  a few species."95 
     Indigenous  farmers  are  exceptionally  alert  to microfeatures   of ter- 
rain  and environment  that  are important   to cultivation.   Two examples 
from  Richards's analysis of West Africa will   serve to illustrate  the small 
details  that are  simply too  minute  to be visible  within   a standardizing 
grid.  Among the bewildering variety  of small-scale, local irrigation  prac- 
tices, Richards  classifies at least eleven different  kinds,  some with  sub- 
variations.  All  depend directly  on locally  specific details  of topography, 
soil, flooding,  rainfall,  and so on, with the type of irrigation  used depend- 
ing  on whether   the area is  a seasonally  flooded  delta, saucer-shaped 
depression with  poor  drainage, or an inland  valley swamp.  These small 

315
298 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


"schemes," which   take  advantage  of the  existing  possibilities   of  the 
landscape, are a far  cry from  vast engineered schemes in which   no ef- 
fort  is  spared to  modify   the landscape  in  conformity    with  the  engi- 
neering plan. 
     Richards's second example shows how  West African farmers  used a 
rather simple  but ingenious choice in what  strain of rice  to plant to help 
them cope with a local pest. Mende farmers on one area of Sierra Leone 
had, against the textbook advice  on the varieties of rice  to be preferred, 
selected a variant of rice  with  long awns (beard or  bristles) and  glumes 
(bracts). The textbook  reasoning was probably  that such varieties  were 
lower  yielding  or  that  the  awns and  glumes  would  simply  add  more 
chaff that would  have to be winnowed after  threshing. The farmers'  rea- 
soning was that  the long awns and glumes  discouraged birds  from  eat- 
ing the  bulk  of their  rice  before  it ever  made it  to the  threshing  floor. 
These details about microirrigation   and the damage caused by birds are 
vital for  local cultivators,   but such details do not  and cannot appear  on 
the high-flying  mapping  of modem agricultural   planning. 
     Many  critics  of  scientific  agriculture   have claimed  not  only  that it 
has systematically  favored  large-scale, production-oriented    monocul- 
ture  but that  its  research findings   are of  at best limited   use, since all 
agriculture  is local.  Howard  argued for a fundamentally   different  prac- 
tice,  basing it  on two  premises.  The first  was  that experimental   plots 
could  not yield  helpful  results. 

     Small plots and farms are very different things. It is impossible to man- 
     age a small plot as a self-contained unit in the same way as a good farm 
     is conducted. The essential relation between livestock  and the land is 
     lost; there are no means of maintaining  the fertility  of the soil  by suit- 
     able rotations as is the rule in good farming. The plot and the farm are 
     obviously out  of relation; the  plot does not even represent the field in 
     which it  occurs. A collection of field plots cannot represent the agricul- 
     tural  problem they set out to investigate. . . . What possible advantage 
     therefore can be obtained by the application of higher  mathematics to 
     a technique which is so fundamentally unsound?96 

     Howard's   second premise is that  many of  the most important   indi- 
cations  of a farm  and a crop's  health  are qualitative:   "Can a mutually 
interacting  system like the crop  and the soil, for example, dependent  on 
a multitude  of factors which  are changing from  week-to-week and year- 
to-year, ever be made to yield  quantitative  results corresponding   to the 
precision  of mat he ma tic^?"^^ As Howard sees it, the danger is that the 
narrow,  experimental,   and exclusively  quantitative  approach  will  suc- 
ceed in completely  driving   out the other  forms of local  knowledge  and 
judgment  possessed by most cultivators. 

316
                                                                                        Taming Nature 299 


     But  Howard   and others,  it  seems to me, miss  the most  important 
abstraction  of experimental  work  in scientific  agriculture.  How  can we 
define how useful  this research is until  we know  the ends to which  cul- 
tivators  will  put  it? Useful for  what?  It is at the  level of human  agency 
where scientific  agriculture   constructs its  greatest abstraction:  the cre- 
ation of  a stock character,  the  Everyman  cultivator,  who  is interested 
only in  realizing  the greatest yields  at the least cost. 


Fictional Farmers Versus Real Farmers 

     Not  only are the  weather, the crops,  and the soil  complex and vari- 
able; the farmer is, too. Season by season and frequently day by day, mil- 
lions  of  cultivators   are  pursuing  an  innumerable   variety   of compli- 
cated goals. These goals  and the  shifting  mix  between  them defy  any 
simple model  or description. 
     Profitable   production   of one or  more  major  crops, the  usual stan- 
dard of agricultural    research, is obviously  one purpose shared by most 
cultivators.  It  is instructive,  nevertheless,  to observe how deeply medi- 
ated this goal  is by other purposes that  may indeed usurp  it altogether. 
The complexities  I suggest below  merely scratch  the surface. 
     Each  farm  family  has  its unique  endowment   of land,  skills,  tools, 
and labor, which  greatly  constrain  how  it farms.  Consider only  one as- 
pect of labor  supply:  a "labor-rich"   farm with  many  able-bodied young 
workers has options in  growing labor-intensive  crops, in planting  sched- 
ules, and in developing  artisan  sidelines that  are not easily available  to 
''labor-poor"   farms. Furthermore,  the same family  farm will  go through 
several stages in the course of a family  cycle of devel~pment.~~Farmers  
who  migrate   out  for  wage  work  during   part   of the  year  may  plant 
crops of  early or late  maturity  or  crops requiring   little  care in  order to 
accommodate  their  migratory   schedule. 
     As  we saw  earlier,  a particular    crop's  profit  may  be tied  to  more 
than just  its  yield in  grain  and the  cost of producing   it. The stubble  of 
a crop  may be crucial  as fodder for  livestock or  waterfowl.  A crop  may 
be vital  because of what  it does to the soil  in rotation   with  other crops 
or how  it assists another crop  with  which  it is interplanted.  A crop  may 
be less important  for its  grain that  for what  it supplies, in  raw material, 
for  artisanal  production,  whether  that  material  is sold in the market  or 
used  at  home.  Families  who  live   close to  the  subsistence  line  may 
choose  their  crops,  not  on the  basis of  their  profitability,    but  on the 
basis of  how  steady their  yields  are and  whether  they can  be eaten if 
their  market  price  plunges. 
      The complexities  thus far  introduced  could,  at least in principle,   be 

317
300 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


accommodated  within   a drastically   modified,   neoclassical  notion   of 
economic  maximization,    even  though  it  would   be  too  elaborate  to 
model easily. Once  we add such considerations   as aesthetics,  rituals, 
taste, and  social  and  political    considerations,   this  is  no  longer  the 
case. There  are any  number   of perfectly   rational   but  noneconomic 
reasons for wanting   to grow  a certain  crop  in  a certain  way, whether 
because one wishes to maintain   cooperative  relations  with  neighbors 
or because a particular   crop is linked   to group  identity.  Such cultural 
habits are perfectly  compatible  with   commercial  success, as the expe- 
rience of the Amish, Mennonites,  and  Hutterites  demonstrates. As long 
as we are pointing  to the high  level of abstraction   of "the  farm family" 
for  whom  scientific   agricultural    research  does  its work,   we  should 
note that,  in much  of the  world,  an understanding   of  the practices  in 
use on almost any farm  will  require  distinguishing   the purposes of the 
various members  of the family.  Each family  enterprise  is, on closer  in- 
spection,  a partnership-albeit       typically   unequal-with       its  own  in- 
ternal  politics. 
     The units  of "farmer"   and  "farm  community"   are, finally,  every bit 
as intricate   and  fluid  as  the weather,   soil,  and  landscape.  Mapping 
them is  even more problematic   than,  say, analyzing  the soil.  The rea- 
son, I think,   is that while  the  farmer's  expertise  may occasionally   fail 
him in  assessing his own soil, we  will  not doubt  the farmer's  expertise 
in knowing  his  own mind  and interests." 
     Just  as the  buzzing  complexity   and  plasticity   of  customary  land 
tenure practices  cannot be satisfactorily  represented  in the straitjacket 
of modern  freehold property   law, so the complex  motives and  goals of 
cultivators  and  the land  they farm  cannot  be effectively   portrayed  by 
the standardizations  of scientific   agriculture.  The schematic  represen- 
tations so important  for  experimental  work  can and have produced im- 
portant  new  knowledge,  which,   suitably  adapted,  has been  incorpo- 
rated into  most agricultural   routines.  But such abstractions,  again like 
those of freehold  tenure, are powerful   misrepresentations  that  usually 
circle  back to influence  reality.  They operate, at  a minimum,  to  gener- 
ate research  and findings  most  applicable  to  farms  that  meet the  de- 
scription   of their  schematization:   large,  monocropped,   mechanized, 
commercial   farms  producing  solely  for  the  market.  In  addition,   this 
standardization  is typically  linked  to public  policy  in the form  of tax in- 
centives, loans, price  supports, marketing   subsidies, and, significantly, 
handicaps  imposed on  enterprises  that  do not  fit the  schematization, 
which  systematically  operate to nudge reality  toward  the grid  of its ob- 
servations.  The effect  is  nothing   like  the  shock therapy   of the  cam- 
paigns for Soviet collectivization   or ujamaa  villages, which  relied more 

318
                                                                                        Taming Nature 301 


on sticks than carrots.  But over the long  haul such a powerful  grid  can, 
and does, change the landscape. 


Two Agricultural     Logics  Compared 

If the logic  of actual farming   is one of an inventive,  practiced  response 
to a highly  variable  environment,   the logic  of scientific  agriculture   is, 
by contrast, one of adapting  the environment  as much as possible to its 
centralizing  and standardizing  formulas. Thanks to the pioneering  work 
of Jan Douwe  van  der Ploeg,  it is  possible to  spell out  how  this logic 
works for  potato cultivation   in  the Andes.loO 
     Van der  Ploeg  calls  indigenous  potato  cultivation    in the  Andes  a 
"craft."101 The cultivator begins with an exceptionally  diverse local ecol- 
ogy and aims at both  successfully adapting  to it and  gradually  improv- 
ing it. Andean  farmers' skills  have allowed  them to achieve results  that 
are quite  respectable  in terms  of  narrow  productionist    goals and  ex- 
traordinarily   so in  terms of reliability   of yields  and sustainability. 
     The typical   farmer  cultivates  anywhere  from  twelve  to  fifteen dis- 
tinct parcels  as well as other plots on a rotating basis.lo2 Given the great 
variety  of conditions  on each plot  (altitude,  soil,  history  of cultivation, 
slope, orientation  to  wind  and sun), each field is  unique. The very idea 
of a "standard field"  in this context is an empty abstraction.  "Some fields 
contain  only  one cultivar,  others  between two  and ten,  sometimes in- 
terplanted  in the  same row or  with  each in its own  row."lo3 Each culti- 
var is a well-placed   bet in its  niche. The variety  of  cultivars  makes for 
local experimentation   with  new  crosses and hybrids,  each of which  is 
tested and exchanged among farmers,  and the many landraces of pota- 
toes thus   developed  have  unique  characteristics    that  become  well 
known.  From the  appearance of  a new variety  to its substantial  use in 
the fields takes at least five or six years. Each  season is the occasion for 
a new round of  prudent bets, with  last season's results in terms of yield, 
disease, prices, and  response to changed  plot  conditions  having  been 
carefully  weighed.   These farms  are market-oriented    experiment  sta- 
tions with  good yields,  great adaptability,  and reliability.   Perhaps more 
important,   they  are  not just   producing   crops;  they  are reproducing 
farmers and  communities  with  plant breeding  skills, flexible  strategies, 
ecological knowledge,  and considerable  self-confidence and autonomy. 
     Compare  this   "craft-based"   potato  production   with   the  inherent 
logic of  scientific  agriculture.  The process begins with  the definition   of 
an ideal  plant  type. "Ideal"  is  defined mainly,  but not  only, in  terms of 
yields. Professional  plant  breeders then  begin synthesizing  the  strains 
that  might  combine  to form  a new  genotype with  the  desired  charac- 

319
302 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


teristics. Then, and only then, are the plant  strains grown  in experimen- 
tal plots in order  to determine  the conditions  under which  the potential 
of the new genotype will  be realized. The basic procedure  is exactly the 
reverse of Andean  craft  production,   where  the  cultivator  begins with 
the plot,  its soil,  and its ecology  and then  selects or develops varieties 
that will   likely  thrive  in  this setting.  The variety  of  cultivars  in  such a 
community  is in large part  a reflection  of the variety of both  local needs 
and ecological conditions.  In  scientific  potato growing,  by contrast,  the 
point of  departure  is the new cultivar   or  genotype, in service  of which 
every effort  is made  to transform   and homogenize  field  conditions  so 
that the field  meets the genotype's specific requirements. 
     The logic of beginning  with an ideal  genotype and then transforming 
nature to accord  with its  growing  conditions  has some predictable con- 
sequences. Extension work  essentially becomes the attempt  to remake 
the farmer's  field  to suit  the genotype. This  usually requires  the  appli- 
cation  of nitrogen  fertilizer   and  pesticides, which   must be purchased 
and applied  at  the right   moment.  It  usually  also requires  a  watering 
regimen  that in  many cases only  irrigation   can possibly  satisfy.lo4 The 
timing  of all  operations  for  this genotype  (planting,  cultivating,   fertil- 
izer spreading,  and so forth)  are  spelled out  carefully. The logic  of the 
process-a   logic  not even remotely realized on the ground-is     to trans- 
form  the farmers  into  "standard"  farmers  growing   the required  geno- 
type on  similar   soils and  leveled fields  and  according  to  the instruc- 
tions printed  right  on the  seed packages, applying the same fertilizers, 
pesticides, and  amounts  of water.  It  is a logic  of homogenization   and 
the virtual   elimination   of local  knowledge.  To the degree that  this ho- 
mogenization  is successful, the genotype will  likely  succeed in terms of 
production  levels  in the short  run.  Conversely, to the  degree that such 
homogenization  is impossible,  the genotype will  fail. 
     Once the job  of the agricultural    specialist  is defined as one of rais- 
ing all  farmers' plots  to the uniform   condition  that will   realize the new 
cultivar's  promise, there is no further  need to attend  to the great variety 
of  conditions-some      of  which   are unalterable-on       actual  farmers' 
fields. Rather  than  have the facts on  the ground  muddy  a simple, uni- 
tary research  issue, it was more convenient  to try  to impose a research 
abstraction  on  the fields  (and lives)  of farmers.   Given the  intractable 
ecological  variety  of the  Andes, this  was a nearly  fatal  step.lo5 Rarely 
have agricultural   specialists asked themselves, as did the  Russian S. P. 
Fridolin  well  before the revolution,  whether  they might  not be working 
from  the wrong  angle:  "He realized  that  his work  was  actually  harm- 
ing  the peasants. Instead  of learning   what  local  conditions  were  and 
then making   agricultural   practice   fit  these conditions   better,  he had 

320
                                                                                        Taming Nature 303 


been trying  to 'improve'   local practice  so that  it would  conform   to ab- 
stract standards."106 It is little  wonder  that  scientific  agriculture   tends 
to favor  the creation   of large  artificial   practices  and environments- 
irrigation   schemes, large and leveled fields, the application  of  fertilizer 
by formula,   greenhouses,  pesticides-all      of which   allow  a  homoge- 
nization  and control  of  nature within   which  "ideal"  experimental  con- 
ditions  for its  genotypes can be maintained. 
     There  is, I  think,  a larger  lesson  here. An  explicit  set of  rules will 
take you further   when  the situation   is cut-and-dried.   The more  static 
and one-dimensional   the stereotype,  the less the need  for creative  in- 
terpretation   and adaptation.   In the  Andes, van der  Ploeg implies,  the 
"rules"  attached  to the  new potato  were  so restrictive  that  they could 
never be successfully translated to the great variety of local farming  ver- 
naculars.  One  of the  major  purposes  of state  simplifications,    collec- 
tivization,  assembly lines,  plantations,  and planned  communities  alike 
is to strip   down reality   to the bare  bones so that  the rules  will  in  fact 
explain more  of the situation  and provide  a better guide to behavior.  To 
the extent that  this simplification   can be imposed,  those who make the 
rules can actually  supply crucial  guidance  and instruction.   This, at any 
rate, is what I take to be the inner logic  of social, economic, and produc- 
tive de-skilling.   If the environment   can be simplified  down to  the point 
where the  rules do explain  a great deal, those who  formulate  the  rules 
and  techniques  have also  greatly  expanded  their   power. They  have, 
correspondingly,  diminished   the power of those who  do not. To the de- 
gree that they  do succeed, cultivators  with  a high  degree of autonomy, 
skills, experience, self-confidence,  and adaptability  are replaced by cul- 
tivators  following  instructions.   Such reduction  in diversity,  movement, 
and life,  to recall Jacobs's term, represents a kind  of social "taxidermy." 
     The new  potato  genotype, as van  der Ploeg shows,  usually  fails,  if 
not immediately,  within   three or four  years. Unlike  the ensemble of in- 
digenous varieties,  the new  cultivar  thrives  within  a narrower   band of 
environmental   conditions.  Many  things, in  other words,  must  go right 
for  the new  cultivar   to produce   well,  and if  any  of these things  goes 
wrong  (too much  hot  weather, late delivery  of  fertilizer,  and  so forth), 
the yields  suffer  dramatically.   Within   a few years  the new  genotypes 
"become incapable  of  generating even low  levels of production."107 
     In  practice,   however,  the vast  majority   of Andean  cultivators   are 
neither  purely  traditional   cultivators  nor  mindless followers  of the sci- 
entific  specialists. They are, instead, crafting  unique amalgams  of strat- 
egies that reflect their  aims, their  resources, and their  local  conditions. 
Where  the  new  potatoes  seem to fit   their  purposes,  they  may  plant 
some, but they  may interplant   them with  other  cultivars  and may  sub- 

321
304 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


stitute  dung,  or  plow  in  green  manure  (alfalfa,   clover),  rather   than 
apply the  standard  fertilizer    package. They  are constantly   inventing 
and experimenting  with  different   rotations,  timing,  and weeding  tech- 
niques. But because of the very  particularity   of these thousands  of "in- 
field experiments"  and the specialists'  studied inattention   to them, they 
are illegible,  if not invisible,  to scientific  research.  Farmers, being poly- 
theists when it  comes to agricultural   practice,  are quick  to seize what- 
ever seems useful from  the epistemic  work  of  formal  science. But  the 
researchers, trained  as monotheists,  seem all but  incapable of  absorb- 
ing the informal   experimental  results  of practice. 


Conclusion 

The great   confidence  that   high-modernist    agriculture   has  inspired 
among its  practitioners   and partisans  should  not  surprise us.  It is  as- 
sociated with   unparalleled   agricultural    productivity    in the  West and 
with  the  power  and  prestige  of  the  scientific   and industrial    revolu- 
tions.  Little  wonder,  then, that  the tenets of  high modernism,   as talis- 
mans of the true  faith,  should have been carried  throughout   the world 
uncritically   and indeed with  the conviction   that they lighted  the way to 
agricultural   progress.'08 1 believe that this uncritical,   and hence unsci- 
entific,  trust  in  the artifacts   and techniques   of what  became codified 
as scientific   agriculture   was  responsible  for  its  failures.   The logical 
companion   to a  complete  faith   in  a quasi-industrial    model  of  high- 
modernist  agriculture   was an often explicit   contempt for  the practices 
of actual  cultivators  and what  might  be learned from  them. Whereas a 
scientific  spirit  would  have counseled skepticism  and dispassionate in- 
quiry  into these practices, modern  agriculture  as a blind faith  preached 
scorn and summary  dismissal. 
     Actual  cultivators   in West Africa  and elsewhere  should more  accu- 
rately  have been understood  as lifelong  experimenters  conducting   in- 
field  seasonal trials,  the  results of  which  they  incorporated  into  their 
ever-evolving repertoire   of practices. Inasmuch  as these experimenters 
were and  are surrounded  by hundreds  or  thousands of  other local  ex- 
perimenters  with   whom  they share  research  findings  and the  knowl- 
edge of generations of earlier  research  as codified in folk  wisdom, they 
could be said to have instant  access to the popular  equivalent of an im- 
pressive research  library.  Now  it  is also undeniably  the  case that they 
carry  out most  of their  research without   the proper  experimental  con- 
trols  and  are therefore   prone  to drawing   false inferences  from   their 
findings.  They  are also  limited   by what  they  can observe;  micropro- 
cesses only visible in  the laboratory   necessarily escape them. Nor  is it 

322
                                                                                        Taming Nature 305 


clear that the ecological  logic  that seems to work  well  on a single farm 
over the long haul will   at the same time produce  sustainable aggregate 
results for  an entire region. 
     That said, it  is also the case, however,  that West African  cultivators 
have at their  disposal  a lifetime   of careful,   local  observation  and  the 
fine-grained  knowledge  of  the  locality  that  no  research  scientist  can 
hope to duplicate  for  the same terrain.  And let  us not fail  to note  what 
kind of  experimenters  these are. Their lives  and the lives of their  fami- 
lies depend directly   on the outcomes  of their  field  experiments.  Given 
these important  positional   advantages, one would  have imagined  that 
agricultural   scientists would  have paid attention  to what  these farmers 
did know.  It was their  failure  to do so, Howard  claims,  that constitutes 
the great shortcoming  of modern  scientific  agriculture:   "The approach 
to the problems  of farming   must be made  from  the field,  not from  the 
laboratory.  The discovery  of the things  that matter  is three  quarters  of 
the battle.  In  this the  observant farmer   and labourer,  who  have spent 
their  lives in  close contact  with  nature,  can  be of greatest  help to  the 
investigator.  The views  of the peasantry  in  all countries  are  worthy  of 
respect; there  is always good reason for their  practices;  in  matters like 
the cultivation   of mixed crops they themselves  are still the pioneers."lo9 
Howard  credits  most  of his own  findings  about  soil,  humus, and  root 
action to  a careful observation  of  indigenous farming   practice.  And he 
is rather  disdainful  of agricultural   specialists  who  "do not have to take 
their  own  adviceu-that    is, who  have never had  to see their  own crop 
through  from  planting  to harvest.'1Â 
     Why, then, the unscientific  scorn for  practical  knowledge? There are 
at least three  reasons for it,  as far as I  can tell. The  first is the  "profes- 
sional"  reason  mentioned  earlier:  the  more  the cultivator   knows,  the 
less the importance  of the  specialist and his  institutions.  The second is 
the  simple  reflex of  high  modernism:  namely,  a contempt   for  history 
and past knowledge. As the scientist  is always associated with  the mod- 
ern  and the  indigenous  cultivator   with   the past  that  modernism  will 
banish,  the  scientist  feels that  he or  she has  little  to  learn  from  that 
quarter.  The  third  reason  is that  practical   knowledge   is represented 
and codified  in a form uncongenial  to scientific  agriculture.  From a nar- 
row  scientific  view, nothing  is known  until   and unless it  is proven in  a 
tightly  controlled  experiment.  Knowledge that  arrives in any form  other 
than  through  the techniques  and instruments   of formal  scientific   pro- 
cedure  does not  deserve to be taken  seriously.  The imperial   pretense 
of scientific  modernism  admits  knowledge only  if it  arrives through  the 
aperture  that  the experimental   method  has constructed  for  its admis- 
sion. Traditional   practices,  codified  as they are  in practice  and  in folk 

323
306 RURAL SETTLEMENT AND PRODUCTION 


sayings, are  seen presumptively   as not  meriting    attention,  let  alone 
verification. 
     And yet,  as we have seen, cultivators  have devised and perfected  a 
host of  techniques  that  do work,  producing   desirable  results  in  crop 
production,  pest control,  soil  preservation,  and so forth.  By constantly 
observing  the  results  of  their  field  experiments   and  retaining   those 
methods that  succeed, the farmers  have  discovered and  refined prac- 
tices that work,  without   knowing  the precise chemical  or physical  rea- 
sons why they work.   In agriculture,   as in  many other  fields,  "practice 
has long preceded theory."111 And indeed some of these practically suc- 
cessful techniques, which  involve  a large number of  simultaneously  in- 
teracting  variables, may never be fully  understood  by the techniques of 
science. We turn, then, to a closer examination   of practical  knowledge, 
a kind of  knowledge that  high  modernism  has ignored  to its peril. 

324
Part 4 



          The Missing Link 

326
9      Thin        Simplifications                  and 
        Practical            Knowledge: 




   No battle-Tarutino, Borodino, or Austerlitz-takes place as those who planned 
   it anticipated. That is an essential condition. 
    -Tolstoy, War and Peace 






We have repeatedly observed the natural and social failures of thin, for- 
mulaic simplifications imposed through the agency of state power. 
The utilitarian commercial and fiscal logic that led to geometric, mono- 
cropped, same-age forests also led to severe ecological damage. Where 
the formula had been applied with the greatest rigor, it eventually be- 
came necessary to attempt to restore much of the forest's original di- 
versity and complexity-or rather, to create a "virtual" forest that 
would mimic the robustness and durability of the "prescientific" forest. 
    The planned "scientific city," laid out according to a small number 
of rational principles, was experienced as a social failure by most of its 
inhabitants. Paradoxically, the failure of the designed city was often 
averted, as was the case in Brasilia, by practical improvisations and il- 
legal acts that were entirely outside the plan. Just as the stripped-down 
logic behind the scientific forest was an inadequate recipe for a healthy, 
"successful" forest, so were the thin urban-planning schemata of Le 
Corbusier an inadequate recipe for a satisfactory human community. 
    Any large social process or event will inevitably be far more com- 
plex than the schemata we can devise, prospectively or retrospectively, 
to map it. Lenin had every reason, as a would-be head of the vanguard 
party, to emphasize military discipline and hierarchy in the revolu- 
tionary project. After the October Revolution, the Bolshevik state au- 
thorities had every reason, once again, to exaggerate the central, all- 
seeing role of the party in bringing the revolution about. And yet we 
know-and  Lenin and Luxemburg knew-that the revolution had 
been a close call, relying more on the improvisations, missteps, and 

327
310 THE MISSING LINK 


strokes of luck that  Tolstoy described in War and Peace than on the pre- 
cision of a parade-ground  drill. 
     The thin   simplifications    of  agricultural    collectivization    and  cen- 
trally  planned production   have met a comparable  fate, whether  on the 
collective farms  of the former  Soviet Union  or in the ujamaa  villages of 
Nyerere's Tanzania. Here again, the schemes that did  not collapse alto- 
gether managed to survive thanks  largely to  desperate measures either 
not envisaged or  else expressly prohibited   by the plan.  Thus an  infor- 
mal economy  developed in Russian  agriculture,  operating   on tiny pri- 
vate plots and and the "theft" of time, equipment, and commodities  from 
the state sector  and supplying   most of  the  dairy  products,  fruit,   veg- 
etables, and meat in the Russian diet.' Thus the forcibly  resettled Tanza- 
nians successfully  resisted  collective  production    and drifted   back  to 
sites more suitable for  grazing and cultivation.   At times, the price  of an 
unyielding  imposition  of state simplifications    on agrarian  life and pro- 
duction-Stalin's      forced  collectivization    or  China's  Great  Leap For- 
ward-was    famine.  As often as not, however, state officials recoiled be- 
fore the abyss and came to  tolerate,  if not  condone, a host of  informal 
practices that  in fact underwrote   the survival  of the official  scheme. 
     These rather extreme instances of  massive, state-imposed social en- 
gineering illustrate,   I think,  a larger point  about formally  organized  so- 
cial action. In  each case, the necessarily thin, schematic model of social 
organization  and  production   animating  the  planning  was inadequate 
as a set of instructions  for  creating  a successful social order.  By them- 
selves, the simplified  rules  can never  generate  a functioning   commu- 
nity, city, or  economy. Formal  order, to be more  explicit,  is always  and 
to some considerable degree parasitic on informal  processes, which  the 
formal  scheme does  not recognize,  without   which   it could  not  exist, 
and which  it alone cannot  create or maintain. 
     This homely  insight  has long been of great tactical  value  to genera- 
tions of  trade  unionists  who  have used it  as the basis of  the work-to- 
rule  strike.  In  a work-to  rule  action  (the  French  call it  gr2ve du zde), 
employees begin doing  their jobs  by meticulously  observing  every one 
of the rules  and  regulations  and performing    only the  duties  stated in 
their job  descriptions.  The result, fully  intended  in this  case, is that the 
work  grinds to a halt,  or at  least to a snail's pace. The workers  achieve 
the practical  effect of a walkout  while  remaining  on the job and follow- 
ing their  instructions  to the letter. Their  action also illustrates  pointedly 
how  actual work   processes depend more  heavily  on informal   under- 
standings and improvisations   than upon formal  work  rules. In  the long 
work-to-rule   action against  Caterpillar,  the large  equipment  manufac- 
turer, for  example, workers  reverted  to following  the  inefficient  proce- 

328
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 3 1 1 


dures specified by the engineers, knowing  they would cost the company 
valuable time  and quality, rather  than  continuing  the more expeditious 
practices  they had long  ago devised on  the job.2 They were relying  on 
the tested assumption  that  working   strictly  by the  book is necessarily 
less productive  than working   with  initiative. 
     This perspective  on social  order  is less an analytical  insight  than  a 
sociological truism.  It  does offer, however, a valuable point of departure 
for understanding   why authoritarian,   high-modernist   schemes are po- 
tentially   so destructive.  What  they ignore-and      often  suppress-are 
precisely the  practical  skills  that  underwrite   any complex  activity.  My 
aim in  this chapter  is to  conceptualize  these practical  skills,  variously 
called know-how   (savoir faire or  arts de faire)^  common sense, experi- 
ence, a knack,  or metis.  What are  these skills? How  are  they created, 
developed, and maintained?  What  is their  relation  to formal  epistemic 
knowledge?  I hope to  show that  many forms  of high  modernism  have 
replaced a valuable  collaboration  between these two  dialects of knowl- 
edge with an "imperial"   scientific view, which  dismisses practical know- 
how  as insignificant   at best  and as dangerous  superstitions  at  worst. 
The relation  between scientific  knowledge  and practical   knowledge is, 
as we shall see, part of a political struggle  for institutional   hegemony by 
experts and their  institutions.   Taylorism  and scientific  agriculture   are, 
on this  reading, not  just strategies  of production,  but  also strategies of 
control  and appropriation. 


Miitis:   The Contours   of  Practical   Knowledge 

Following  the illuminating    studies of Marcel  Detienne and Jean-Pierre 
Vernant, we can find  in the  Greek concept of metis a means of compar- 
ing  the  forms  of  knowledge  embedded  in  local  experience  with   the 
more general,  abstract  knowledge deployed by the  state and its techni- 
cal agen~ies.~Before  elaborating  the concept  and its  use, we will  turn 
to  a brief  example  in  order  to  illustrate   the  vernacular   character  of 
local  knowledge  and ground  the discussion that  follows. 
     When  the first  European settlers in  North  America were  wondering 
when and how  to plant New World  cultivars,  such as maize, they turned 
to  the local  knowledge   of their  Native   American  neighbors  for  help. 
They were told  by Squanto,  according  to one  legend (Chief Massasoit, 
according  to  another), to  plant corn  when the  oak leaves were the size 
of a squirrel's  ear.5 Embedded in this  advice, however  folkloric  its  ring 
today,  is  a  finely  observed  knowledge   of  the  succession  of  natural 
events in the New  England spring.  For Native  Americans it  was this or- 
derly succession of,  say, the skunk cabbage appearing,  the willows   be- 

329
312 THE MISSING LINK 


ginning  to leaf,  the red-wing   blackbird   returning,   and the  first  hatch 
of the  mayfly  that  provided   a readily  observable  calendar   of spring. 
While the timing  of these events might be earlier  or later in  a given year 
and while the  pace of their  succession might be more  drawn  out or ac- 
celerated, the  sequence of the events was  almost  never violated.  As a 
rule of  thumb,  it  was a nearly  foolproof   formula   for avoiding   a frost. 
We almost certainly  distort   Squanto's advice,  as the colonists perhaps 
did, by reducing  it  to a single  observation.  Everything  we  know about 
indigenous  technical  knowledge  suggests that  it relies  on an accumu- 
lation  of  many partly   redundant  signals.  If  other  indications   did  not 
confirm  the oak-leaf  formula,  a prudent  planter  might  delay further. 
     Compare  this  advice to  that  based on more  universalistic   units  of 
measurement. A typical  local edition  of  The Farmer's Almanac is a case 
in point.  It  may  suggest planting  corn  after  the first  full  moon in  May 
or after  a specified date, such as May 20.  In New  England, at  any rate, 
this advice  would  require  considerable  adjustment  by latitude   and al- 
titude. A date that  would serve for  southern Connecticut  would  not suit 
Vermont;  a date that  worked  in  the valleys  would  not be right   for the 
hills  (especially  the north-facing   slopes);  a date that  worked  near the 
coast would not work  inland.  And the almanac's date is almost certainly 
a fail-safe date, since the  worst thing  that  could happen  to an almanac 
publisher  would be to have his or  her advice lead to  a crop failure.  As a 
result  of  this commercial    caution,  some valuable   growing  time  may 
have been lost in the  interest  of ~ertainty.~ 
     The Native  American  maxim,   by contrast,  is vernacular   and local, 
keyed to common  features of the local  ecosystem; it inquires  about oak 
leaves in this place, and not oak leaves in general. Despite its specificity, 
it travels  remarkably  well.  It can be deployed  successfully anywhere in 
temperate North  America  where  there are oak trees and squirrels.  The 
precision  provided  by the  observed sequence almost  certainly  gains a 
few  days of  growing   time  while   not  appreciably   raising   the risk   of 
planting  before  a hard frost. 
     Practical   knowledge   like  Squanto's  can,  of course,  be  translated 
into  more universalistic   scientific  terms.  A botanist might  observe that 
the first   growth  of  oak leaves is  made possible  by rising   ground  and 
ambient  temperatures, which  also assure that maize will  grow  and that 
the probability    of a killing   frost  is negligible.  The  mean soil  tempera- 
ture  at a given depth  might  do just as well.  Along these lines, the  early 
nineteenth-century   mathematician,   Adolph  Quetelet, turned  his scien- 
tific  eye to  the mundane  problem   of  when the  lilacs  would  bloom  in 
Brussels.  He concluded,  after  much  rigorous  observation,   that the  li- 
lacs burst  into  bloom  "when  the sum of  the squares of the mean  daily 

330
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 3 1 3 


temperature  since the last frost added up  to (4264C) ~quared."~ Knowl- 
edge this  certainly  is!  Given  the techniques  for   making  the required 
observations,  it  is probably  quite  accurate.  But  it  is hardly  practical. 
Quetelet's playful   formula   alerts  us to  a hallmark   of  most  practical, 
local knowledge:  it  is as economical  and accurate  as it needs to be, no 
more and no  less, for addressing the  problem  at hand. 
     One hesitates before introducing   yet another  unfamiliar   term,  such 
as "metis," into  this discussion.  In this  case, however, "mEtis" seems to 
better  convey the sorts  of practical   skills  that  I have  in mind  than  do 
such plausible  alternatives  as "indigenous  technical  knowledge,"  "folk 
wisdom,"  "practical  skills,"  techne, and so 
     The concept comes to us from the ancient  Greeks. Odysseus was fre- 
quently praised for  having metis in abundance  and for using it  to outwit 
his enemies and make  his way home.  Metis is typically   translated  into 
English  as "cunning"  or  "cunning  intelligence."   While  not wrong,  this 
translation  fails to do justice  to the range of knowledge and skills  repre- 
sented by metis. Broadly  understood,  metis  represents a wide  array  of 
practical  skills  and acquired  intelligence  in responding  to  a constantly 
changing natural  and human  environment.  Odysseus's metis was in evi- 
dence, not only  in his deceiving  of Circe, the  Cyclops, and Polyphemus 
and in binding  himself  to the mast to avoid  the Sirens, but  also in hold- 
ing his  men together,  in repairing   his ship,  and in  improvising   tactics 
to get his men  out of one tight  spot after  another. The emphasis is both 
on Odysseus's ability to adapt  successfully to a constantly  shifting  situ- 
ation  and on his capacity  to understand,  and  hence outwit,  his human 
and divine  adversaries. 
     All   human  activities   require  a  considerable  degree  of  metis,  but 
some activities require  far more.  To begin with skills that  require  adapt- 
ing  to a capricious   physical  environment,   the acquired  knowledge   of 
how to  sail, fly a kite, fish,  shear sheep, drive a car, or ride  a bicycle re- 
lies on the capacity  for metis. Each  of these skills requires hand-eye co- 
ordination  that  comes with practice  and a capacity to  "read" the waves, 
the wind,   or the  road  and to make  the appropriate   adjustments.   One 
powerful   indication   that they  all  require  metis  is that they  are excep- 
tionally  difficult   to teach apart  from  engaging in the  activity  itself. One 
might  imagine trying  to write  down  explicit  instructions  on how  to ride 
a bicycle, but one can scarcely imagine  that such instructions  would  en- 
able  a novice  to  ride  a bicycle  on  the  first  try.  The maxim   "Practice 
makes perfect"  was devised for  such activities  as this, inasmuch  as the 
continual,   nearly imperceptible   adjustments  necessary for  riding  a bi- 
cycle  are best  learned by  having  to make  them.  Only  through  an  ac- 
quired  "feel"  for balanced motion  do the  required  adjustments become 

331
314 THE MISSING LINK 


auto ma ti^.^ No wonder that  most crafts  and  trades requiring   a touch 
or feel for  implements  and materials  have traditionally   been taught  by 
long apprenticeships  to  master craftsmen. 
     There is  no doubt  that  some individuals   seem to get the  hang of a 
particular   skill   and master  it  more  quickly   than  most  other  people. 
But beyond  this ineffable  difference  (which  often  spells the difference 
between competence and genius),  riding  a bike, sailing,  fishing, shear- 
ing sheep, and so on can be learned through practice.  Since every road, 
wind, stream,  and sheep is different  and continually  changing,  the best 
practitioner,  like Odysseus, will have had experience under many differ- 
ent conditions. If  your life depended on your ship coming through  rough 
weather, you would  surely prefer a successful captain  with  long experi- 
ence to, say, a brilliant  physicist  who  had analyzed the natural   laws of 
sailing but  who had  never actually  sailed a vessel. 
     Those specialists who  deal with  emergencies and disasters  are also 
exemplary  of  metis.  Firefighters,   rescue  squads, paramedics,   mine- 
disaster teams, doctors in  hospital emergency rooms,  crews that repair 
downed electrical  lines,  teams that extinguish  fires in  oil fields,  and, as 
we shall see, farmers and pastoralists  in precarious  environments  must 
respond quickly  and decisively to limit  damage and save lives. Although 
there are  rules of thumb  that  can be and  are taught,  each fire or  acci- 
dent is unique,  and half  the battle  is knowing  which  rules  of thumb  to 
apply in  which order  and when  to throw  the book away and improvise. 
     Red  Adair's  team,  which  has  been hired   worldwide   to  cap  well- 
head fires, was  a striking  and  diagnostic  case. Before the  Gulf War  of 
1990, his was the only team with  any appreciable  "clinical"   experience, 
and he could  set his own price.  Each fire presented  new problems  and 
required  an inspired  mixture  of experience  and improvisation.   We can 
imagine,  at almost opposite ends of a spectrum, Adair  on one hand and 
a minor  clerk  performing   highly  repetitive   steps on the  other. Adair's 
job cannot,  by definition,   be reduced to  a routine.  He must  begin with 
the unpredictable-an     accident,  a fire-and    then devise the techniques 
and  equipment  (from   an existing   repertoire,   to be  sure, but  one  in- 
vented  largely  by  him)  required   to extinguish   that  fire  and  cap that 
well.1Â The clerk, by contrast,  deals with   a predictable,  routinized   en- 
vironment  that  can often be ordered in  advance and down to the small- 
est detail.  Adair  cannot  simplify   his environment   in  order  to  apply  a 
cookie-cutter  solution. 
     The examples thus far  introduced  have been mostly concerned with 
the relation  between people  and their physical  environment.  But  metis 
equally  applies  to human   interaction.   Think  of the  complex  physical 
activities   that  require  constant  adjustment  to  the  movement,  values, 

332
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 3 15 


desires, or  gestures of others.  Boxing,  wrestling,   and fencing  require 
instant, quasi-automatic   responses to an opponent's moves, which  can 
be learned only through   long practice  of the activity  itself.  Here the  el- 
ement of  deception  enters as well.  The  successful boxer  will  learn  to 
feint a move  in order  to provoke  a response of which  he can then  take 
advantage. If  we move from  physical  contests to  such cooperative  ac- 
tivities  as dancing,  music,  or lovemaking,   a similar  practiced  respon- 
siveness born of experience is essential. Many  sports combine  both the 
cooperative  and the competitive  aspects of metis. A soccer player must 
learn not  only the  moves of his or  her teammates  but also which  team 
moves and fakes will  deceive their   opponents. Such  skills, it  is impor- 
tant to note,  are both generic  and particular;   while each player  may be 
more  or less skilled  at  different  facets of  the game, each  team has its 
particular   combination  of  skills, its  "chemistry," and  each contest with 
an opposing team represents a challenge  that is in some ways unique.ll 
     On  a much bigger,  higher-stakes  canvas, war  diplomacy   and poli- 
tics more  generally  are metis-laden  skills.  The successful practitioner, 
in each case, tries  to shape the behavior  of  partners  and opponents  to 
his own  ends.  Unlike  the  sailor,  who can  adjust  to  the wind   and the 
waves but  not influence   them  directly,  the general  and  the politician 
are in  constant  interaction   with   their  counterparts,   each of  whom  is 
trying  to  outfox the  other. Adapting  quickly  and  well to  unpredictable 
events-both     natural  events, such as the weather,  and human  events, 
such  as the  enemy's move-and      making  the  best  out  of limited   re- 
sources are  the kinds  of skills  that  are hard  to teach  as cut-and-dried 
disciplines. 
     The necessarily  implicit,  experiential   nature of metis seems central. 
A simple experiment  in  implicit  learning  conducted  by the philosopher 
Charles Peirce may help to convey something  of the process. Peirce had 
people lift  two weights  and judge which  of the two  was heavier. At first, 
their  discrimination    was rather   crude. But  as they practiced   for  long 
periods, they became able to distinguish   accurately quite  minute differ- 
ences in weight.  They could  not  pinpoint  what  it  was that they  sensed 
or felt, but  their actual capacity  to discriminate  grew enormously. Peirce 
took  the results  as evidence  for  a kind  of  subliminal   communication 
via  "faint sensations"  between people. For  our purposes, however,  it il- 
lustrates  a rudimentary    kind  of knowledge  that  can be acquired   only 
by practice   and that  all  but  defies being communicated   in  written   or 
oral  form  apart from  actual  practice.12 
      Surveying  the range of  examples that  we have touched  on, we can 
venture  some  preliminary    generalizations   about the  nature  of  metis 
and about  where it  is relevant. Metis  is most applicable  to broadly  sim- 

333
316 THE MISSING LINK 


ilar but  never precisely identical  situations  requiring   a quick and prac- 
ticed adaptation  that becomes almost second nature to the practitioner. 
The skills of metis  may well  involve  rules of thumb,  but  such rules are 
largely acquired  through  practice  (often in formal  apprenticeship)   and 
a developed feel or knack  for  strategy. Metis resists simplification    into 
deductive  principles   which  can  successfully  be transmitted    through 
book learning,  because the environments in which  it  is exercised are so 
complex  and nonrepeatable   that  formal  procedures  of  rational  deci- 
sion making  are impossible to  apply. In  a sense, metis lies in that large 
space between the realm of genius, to which  no formula  can apply, and 
the realm  of codified  knowledge, which   can be learned by rote. 


The Art of the Locality 

     Why  are the  rules  of thumb   that  can be derived  from   any skilled 
craft still  woefully  inadequate  to its practice?  Artists  or cooks, Michael 
Oakeshott has noted, may  in fact write  about  their  art and try  to boil  it 
down to technical  knowledge,  but what they write  represents  not much 
of what  they know  but  rather  only  that small  part  of their  knowledge 
that can be reduced to  exposition.  Knowing  a craft's shorthand  rules is 
a very long way  from  its accomplished  performance:   "These rules and 
principles  are mere abridgements  of the activity  itself;  they do not exist 
in advance of the activity,  they cannot  properly  be said to govern it  and 
they cannot  provide  the impetus  of the activity.  A complete  mastery of 
the principles   may  exist alongside  a complete  inability   to  pursue the 
activity  to which  they refer, for  the pursuit  of the  activity  does not con- 
sist in the application   of these principles;   and even if it  did, the knowl- 
edge of how to apply  them (the  knowledge of  actually pursuing  the  ac- 
tivity)  is not  given in a knowledge  of them."13 
     Knowing   how  and when  to apply  the rules  of  thumb  in a concrete 
situation   is the essence of metis. The  subtleties of  application   are im- 
portant  precisely   because metis  is most  valuable  in  settings that  are 
mutable,  indeterminant    (some facts  are  unknown),   and particular.14 
Although  we shall return  to the question  of indeterminacy   and change, 
here I  want to  explore further  the  localness and particularity    of metis. 
     In  seamanship, the difference  between the more general knowledge 
of navigation  and the more  particular   knowledge of piloting   is instruc- 
tive. When a large freighter  or passenger liner approaches a major  port, 
the captain  typically  turns  the control  of his vessel over to a local pilot, 
who  brings  it into  the  harbor  and to  its berth.  The same procedure  is 
followed  when the ship  leaves its berth until  it is safely out into  the sea- 
lanes. This  sensible  procedure,   designed to  avoid  accidents,  reflects 

334
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 3 17 


the fact that navigation  on the open sea (a more "abstract"  space) is the 
more general  skill, while  piloting   a ship through   traffic  in a particular 
port is a highly  contextual skill.  We might call the art  of piloting  a "local 
and situated knowledge."  What the pilot  knows  are local tides  and cur- 
rents along  the coast  and estuaries, the  unique  features of  local wind 
and wave patterns, shifting sandbars, unmarked  reefs, seasonal changes 
in microcurrents,  local  traffic conditions,  the daily  vagaries of wind pat- 
terns off  headlands  and along  straits,  how  to pilot   in  these waters  at 
night, not  to mention  how to bring   many different  ships safely to berth 
under  variable   condition^.^^ Such  knowledge  is particular,   by  defini- 
tion;  it can  be acquired  only  by local  practice  and  experience.  Like a 
bird  or  an insect  that  has adapted  brilliantly    to  a narrow   ecological 
niche, the pilot  knows  one harbor. Much  of his knowledge  would  be ir- 
relevant  if he  were suddenly  transposed  to a different   port.16 Despite 
the rather  narrow   context  of this knowledge,   it is agreed by  captains, 
harbormasters,   and, not  least, those who  insure  maritime   commerce 
against losses that the pilot's  knowledge  of a particular   port  must  pre- 
vail.  The pilot's  experience  is  locally  superior  to  the  general  rules of 
navigation. 
     Mark  Twain's classic Life  on the Mississippi   reflects at great  length 
on the knowledge  acquired  by riverboat  pilots.  Part  of that knowledge 
consists of rules  of thumb  about surface  features that  may signal  shal- 
lows, currents,  or other navigational  hazards.  Much of it, however, con- 
sists of a quite  specific  familiarity    with  their  particular    stretch  of the 
Mississippi at different  seasons and water levels-knowledge    that could 
have been gained in that  particular   place only  through  experience. Al- 
though  there is  something  that might  properly   be called  a knowledge 
of rivers in general,  it is a quite thin and unsatisfactory  knowledge when 
it comes to making  a particular   trip  on a particular  river.  A native pilot 
is no less necessary  on a given  river  than  a native tracker   for  a given 
jungle  or a local  guide  in Bruges  or in  the medina  of  an ancient  Arab 
city. 
     The  practice   and experience   reflected  in  metis  is  almost  always 
local.  Thus  a  guide  on mountain   climbing    may be  best at  Zermatt, 
which  she has scaled often;  an airplane  pilot   best on Boeing  747s, on 
which  he was trained;  and the orthopedic  surgeon best at knees, where 
her surgical   experience has given  her a certain  expertise.  It  is not en- 
tirely  clear  how  much of  these experts' metis  would  be transferable  if 
they were  suddenly shifted  to Mont  Blanc,  DC3s, and hands. 
     Every   instance   of  the  application    of  a  given   skill  will    require 
specific  adjustments for  local  conditions.  For  a weaver, each new sup- 
ply of  yarn or  thread  handles differently.   For a potter,  a new supply  of 

335
318 THE MISSING LINK 


clay "works"   differently.  Long experience  with  different  materials  will 
have the effect of making such adjustments  quasi-automatic.  The speci- 
ficity  of knowledge   goes even deeper, in  the sense that  each loom  or 
potter's wheel  has its own distinctive  qualities,  which  an artisan comes 
to know  and  appreciate  (or  work  around).  Every  general  knowledge 
that is actually  applied,  then, requires  some imaginative  translation.   A 
consummate knowledge  of looms in  general does not translate  directly 
into the  successful operation  of this particular   loom  with  its peculiari- 
ties of design, use, woods, and repairs.  To speak of the art of one loom, 
the art  of one river, the  art of  one tractor,  or the art  of one automobile 
is not preposterous;  it is  to point  to the size and importance   of the gap 
between general knowledge  and situated  knowledge. 
     We might   reasonably think   of  situated,  local  knowledge  as being 
partisan knowledge as opposed to generic knowledge. That is, the holder 
of such knowledge typically  has a passionate interest in a particular out- 
come. An  insurer  of commercial   shipping   for  a large,  highly  capital- 
ized maritime   firm  can  afford  to  rely on  probability   distributions    for 
accidents. But  for  a sailor or  captain hoping  for  a safe voyage, it is the 
outcome  of the  single  event,  a single  trip,  that  matters.   Metis  is the 
ability   and  experience  necessary to  influence   the  outcome-to      im- 
prove the odds-in     a particular   instance. 
     The state simplifications  and  utopian schemes we have examined in 
earlier  chapters  all concern  activities  that  are  carried  out in  spatially 
and temporally   unique  settings.  While  something  can indeed  be said 
about forestry,  revolution,   urban planning,   agriculture,   and rural   set- 
tlement  in  general, this  will  take  us only  so far in  understanding   this 
forest,  this  revolution,  this  farm.  All  farming   takes place  in a  unique 
space (fields,  soil, crops)  and at  a unique  time  (weather  pattern,  sea- 
son, cycle in pest populations)  and for  unique ends (this  family  with  its 
needs and tastes).  A mechanical  application    of generic  rules  that  ig- 
nores these  particularities   is  an invitation   to  practical   failure,  social 
disillusionment,   or most likely  both.  The generic formula  does not  and 
cannot supply  the local knowledge  that  will  allow  a successful transla- 
tion  of the necessarily crude  general understandings  to successful,  nu- 
anced, local  applications.   The more  general  the rules,  the  more they 
require  in  the  way of  translation   if  they are  to be  locally  successful. 
Nor  is it simply  a matter  of the  captain  or navigator   realizing  at what 
point  his rules of thumb  are inferior  to  the intimate  local  knowledge of 
the pilot.  Rather,  it  is a matter  of recognizing   that  the rules  of thumb 
themselves are largely  a codification  derived  from  the actual practices 
of sailing  and piloting. 
     One last  analogy may help  to clarify  the  relationship  between  gen- 

336
                                                                                 Practical Knowledge 3 19 


era1 rules of thumb  and metis.  Metis is  not merely  the specification  of 
local values (such as the local  mean temperature  and rainfall)   made in 
order to successfully apply a generic formula  to  a local case. Taking lan- 
guage as a parallel,   I believe  that the  rule  of thumb  is  akin  to formal 
grammar, whereas metis is more like actual speech. Metis is no more de- 
rivative  of general  rules than  speech is derivative  of grammar.  Speech 
develops from  the cradle  by imitation,   use, trial  and error.  Learning  a 
mother  tongue  is a stochastic  process-a     process of successive, self- 
correcting  approximations.   We do not  begin by learning  the  alphabet, 
individual   words, parts  of speech, and rules  of grammar  and then  try- 
ing to  use them  all  in order  to  produce  a grammatically   correct   sen- 
tence. Moreover,  as Oakeshott  indicates,  a  knowledge  of the  rules  of 
speech by themselves is compatible  with  a complete  inability   to speak 
intelligible   sentences. The assertion that  the rules  of grammar  are  de- 
rivative  of the practice   of actual speech is nearer  to the truth.   Modern 
language training   that aims at competence  in speaking recognizes  this 
and begins with  simple  speech and  rote repetition   in order  to imprint 
pattern  and accent while  leaving the rules  of grammar  implicit,   or else 
introducing   them later  as a way of  codifying  and summarizing   practi- 
cal mastery. 
     Like  language,  the metis  or local  knowledge  necessary to  the suc- 
cessful practice  of farming   or pastoralism   is probably  best learned  by 
daily  practice   and  experience.   Like  serving   a long   apprenticeship, 
growing  up  in  a household  where  that  craft  is  continually   practiced 
often represents  the most satisfactory  preparation  for  its exercise. This 
kind  of  socialization   to  a trade  may  favor  the  conservation   of skills 
rather  than  daring  innovation.   But  any formula  that  excludes or  sup- 
presses the experience, knowledge, and adaptability  of metis risks  inco- 
herence and  failure;  learning  to speak coherent  sentences involves far 
more than  merely  learning  the rules  of grammar. 


The Relation with Episterne and Techne 

     For the  Greeks and particularly   for  Plato, episteme and techne rep- 
resented  knowledge   of  an  order  completely   different   from   mEtis.l7 
Technical knowledge,  or techne, could be expressed precisely and com- 
prehensively  in  the  form  of hard-and-fast   rules  (not  rules of  thumb), 
principles,   and propositions.   At  its most  rigorous,  techne is  based on 
logical  deduction  from  self-evident  first  principles.  As an ideal  type, it 
radically   differs  from  metis  in  terms of  how it  is organized,   how it  is 
codified  and taught,  how  it is modified,   and the analytical   precision  it 
exhibits. 

337
320 THE MISSING LINK 


     Where metis is contextual  and particular,   techne is universal. In  the 
logic of mathematics,  ten  multiplied   by ten equals one hundred  every- 
where and  forever;   in  Euclidean  geometry,  a  right  angle  represents 
ninety degrees of  a circle;  in  the  conventions  of physics,  the freezing 
point  of water   is always  zero  degrees centigrade.18 Techne is settled 
knowledge;  Aristotle  wrote  that  techne  "came  into  being  when  from 
many notions  gained from  experience,  a universal  judgement  about  a 
group of similar   things arises."19 The universality of techne arises from 
the fact that it is organized  analytically  into  small, explicit,  logical  steps 
and is both decomposable  and verifiable.  This  universality  means that 
knowledge in the  form of techne  can be taught more or  less completely 
as a formal discipline. The rules of techne provide  for theoretical  knowl- 
edge that may or may not have practical   applications.  Finally, techne is 
characterized by impersonal,  often quantitative  precision and a concern 
with explanation  and verification,  whereas metis  is concerned with per- 
sonal skill, or  "touch," and  practical  results. 
     If  the description   of techne as an  ideal or  typical  system of knowl- 
edge resembles the self-image  of modern  science, that  is no  accident. 
The actual practice  of science, however, is something  else agaiaZ0 The 
rules of  techne are  the specification   of  how  knowledge  is to be  codi- 
fied, expressed, and verified,   once it has been  discovered.  No rules  of 
techne or  episteme  can explain  scientific   invention   and insight.   Dis- 
covering  a mathematical  theorem  requires  genius and  perhaps metis; 
the proof  of the theorem,  however,  must follow   the tenets of  techne.Z1 
Thus the systematic  and impersonal   rules of techne  facilitate  the  pro- 
duction  of knowledge  that can be readily  assembled, comprehensively 
documented, and formally  taught,  but they cannot by themselves add to 
that knowledge or  explain how  it came into  being2* 
     Techne is characteristic,   above all, of self-contained  systems of rea- 
soning in  which  the findings   may be logically  derived  from  the  initial 
assumptions. To the  degree that  the form  of  knowledge satisfies  these 
conditions, to that  degree is it impersonal, universal, and completely  im- 
pervious to context.  But  the context  of metis, as Detienne  and Vernant 
emphasize, is characteristically    "situations   which  are transient,  shift- 
ing, disconcerting   and ambiguous,  situations  which  do not lend  them- 
selves to precise measurement,  exact calculation,   or  rigorous  logic."23 
Nussbaum shows  convincingly  how  Plato  attempted,  especially in  the 
Republic, to transform   the realm  of love-a     realm that  almost by  defi- 
nition   is  one of  contingency,   desire,  and  impulse-into      a  realm  of 
techne or  epi~teme.~~Plato  regarded  mundane  love as subject  to the 
lower  appetites, and he hoped to purge  it of these base instincts so that 
it could  more closely resemble  the philosopher's  pure  search for truth. 

338
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 32 1 


The superiority    of  pure  reasoning,  especially   scientific   and  mathe- 
matical  logic,  lay in  the fact  that  it was  "pure  of pain,  maximally   sta- 
ble, and directed  at the truth."  The objects of  such reasoning  "are eter- 
nally  what  they  are regardless  of  what  human  beings  do  and say."25 
What one loved, or should love, Plato claimed,  was not the beloved him- 
self but   rather  the  pure  forms   of unalloyed   beauty  reflected   in  the 
beloved.26 Only in this way could love remain straight  and rational,  free 
of the appetites. 
     The  spheres  of  human  endeavor  that   are  freest  of  contingency, 
guesswork, context,  desire, and personal  experience-and    thus  free of 
metis-hence    came to be perceived as man's highest pursuits.  They are 
the philosopher's   work.  One can see why, on the  strength  of such cri- 
teria,  Euclidean  geometry, mathematics,  some self-contained  forms  of 
analytical  philosophy,  and perhaps  music are considered  to be  among 
the purest  of  pursuit^.^'  Unlike  the  natural  sciences and  concrete  ex- 
periments,  these disciplines exist as realms of pure  thought, untouched 
by the contingencies  of  the material  world.   They begin in  the mind  or 
on a blank  sheet  of paper. The  Pythagorean theorem,   a2 + b2 =  c2, is 
true  for all  right  triangles  everywhere  and forever. 
     A recurrent  theme  of Western philosophy and science, including   so- 
cial science, has been the attempt to  reformulate  systems of knowledge 
in order  to  bracket uncertainty   and  thereby permit   the kind  of logical 
deductive  rigor  possessed by Euclidean geometry.28 In the natural  sci- 
ences, the results  have been revolutionary.   Where philosophy   and the 
human  sciences are concerned, the  efforts have been just as persistent 
but  the  results  far  more  ambiguous.  Descartes's famous  episteme  "I 
think,  therefore  I  am" mimicked  the  first step in  a mathematical  proof 
and was an  "answer to  the disorder  that  threatened to  undo society."29 
The aim  of  Jeremy  Bentham  and  the  utilitarians   was,  through   their 
calculus  of pleasure and pain  (hedonism),  to reduce the study  of ethics 
to a pure natural   science, to an examination  of "every circumstance   by 
which  an  individual   can be  influenced,  being  remarked  and invento- 
ried,  nothing  . . . left to chance, caprice,  or unguided  discretion,  every- 
thing  being surveyed  and set down in dimension,   number, weight,  and 
measure."30 
      Even chance  (tuche) itself,  which   techne was  designed to  master, 
was eventually, thanks  to statistics  and probability  theory,  transformed 
into  a singular  fact that  might  enter  the formulas  of techne.  Risk, pro- 
viding  it  could be assigned a known  probability,  became a fact like  any 
other, whereas  uncertainty  (where  the underlying  probabilities   are not 
known)   still  lay  outside techne's  reach.3' The  intellectual   "career"   of 
risk  and uncertainty  is indicative   of many fields of inquiry   in which  the 

339
322 THE MISSING LINK 


realm of analysis  was reformulated  and narrowed   to exclude elements 
that could  not  be quantified   and measured  but could  only  be judged. 
Better put,  techniques  were  devised to  isolate and  domesticate  those 
aspects of key variables that might  be expressed in numbers  (a nation's 
wealth by gross national  product,  public  opinion  by poll  numbers,  val- 
ues by psychological  inventories).   Neoclassical  economics,  for exam- 
ple, has undergone a transformation   along these lines. Consumer pref- 
erences are first taken as a given and then  counted, in  order to bracket 
taste as a major source of uncertainty. Invention and entrepreneurial  ac- 
tivity  are  treated  as exogenous and cast  outside  the perimeter   of the 
discipline  as too intractable to submit  to measurement and predicti~n.~~ 
The discipline  has incorporated  calculable  risk while  exiling  those top- 
ics where  genuine  uncertainty   prevails  (ecological   dangers, shifts  in 
taste).33 As Stephen Marglin shows, "the emphasis on self-interest, calcu- 
lation, and  maximization  in  economics" are classical  examples of "self- 
evident postulates" and reflect  "more  an ideological commitment  to  the 
superiority  of episteme  than a serious attempt  to unravel  the complex- 
ities and mysteries  of human  motivation   and behavior."34 
     The logic  of such  reformulations   is analogous  to the  experimental 
practice  and self-imposed boundaries  of modern  scientific  agriculture. 
By constricting   its  field  of inquiry,   it gained  enormously   in precision 
and scientific  power  at the possible expense of irrelevance  or  unpleas- 
ant surprises from beyond its  artificial   perimeter^.^^ Techne is most suit- 
able to activities  "that  have a singular  end or goal, an end that  is speci- 
fiable apart  from  the activity  itself,  and one susceptible  to quantitative 
mea~urement."~~Thus the problem most  successfully addressed by sci- 
entific  agriculture   is how  to  grow  the largest  number  of  bushels of  a 
crop at  the least cost per  acre, as revealed  through  one-variable-at-a- 
time trials  conducted  on experimental  plots.  Issues of farming  life  and 
community,  family  needs, long-term soil structure,  ecological  diversity, 
and sustainability   are  either difficult   to  incorporate   or excluded  alto- 
gether. Formulas  of  efficiency, production   functions,   and rational   ac- 
tion  are  specifiable  only   when  the  ends sought  are  simple,  sharply 
defined, and  hence measurable. 
     The problem, as Aristotle recognized, is that certain  practical  choices 
cannot,  "even in principle,  be adequately  and completely  captured in  a 
system of universal  rules.'j3' He singled out navigation  and medicine  as 
two  activities  in which   the practical   wisdom  of long  experience is  in- 
dispensable to superior  performance.  They were  metis-laden  activities 
in which  responsiveness, improvisation,  and skillful,  successive approx- 
imations  were required.  If  Plato can be credited,  Socrates deliberately 
refrained  from writing   down his teachings, because he believed that the 

340
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 323 


activity   of philosophy   belonged   more  to  metis  than  to  episteme  or 
techne. A written   text, even if  it takes the  form  of a philosophical   dia- 
logue,  is a  cut-and-dried   set  of codified   rules.  An  oral  dialogue,   by 
contrast,  is alive  and responsive  to  the mutuality   of the  participants, 
reaching  a destination   that  cannot be  specified  in advance.  Socrates 
evidently  believed  that  the interaction   between  teacher  and students 
that  we now  call  the  Socratic  method,   and not  the  resulting  text,  is 
philo~ophy.~~ 


Practical Knowledge Versus Scientific Explanation 

     Only  by grasping the  potential  achievement  and range of metis  is it 
possible  to  appreciate  the  valuable   knowledge  that   high-modernist 
schemes deprive  themselves of when  they  simply  impose their   plans. 
One major  reason  why  metis  is denigrated,   particularly   in  the  hege- 
monic  imperium  of scientific  knowledge,  is that its  "findings"  are prac- 
tical,  opportune,   and contextual   rather  than  integrated  into  the  gen- 
eral conventions  of  scientific  discourse. 
     We have seen the  idiosyncracies  of  metis at  work  in the  historical 
vernaculars  of measurement of area, weight,  and volume.  The aim was 
always to achieve  a local purpose  or to express an important   local fea- 
ture  (such as "a farm of  two cows")  rather  than to accommodate  some 
universal  unit  of measurement.  Like  Squanto's  maxim,  such vernacu- 
lar  measures apparently  often conveyed more  information   than an ab- 
stract  measure  could.  They certainly   conveyed  information   that  was 
more locally  relevant.  It  was just this  local, practical   index, which  var- 
ied from  place to place, that  ensured that metis would  be confusing,  in- 
coherent,  and unassimilable  for  purposes of  statecraft. 
     The  classification   of flora  follows  much  the  same logic  among  in- 
digenous people. What  matters is local use and value. Thus the categor- 
ies into  which  various plants  are sorted  follow  a logic of  practical  use: 
good for  making  soup, good for  making  twine,  helpful  in healing  cuts, 
effective  for settling  an  upset stomach, poisonous  for  cattle, useful  for 
weaving  our cloth,  favored  by rabbits  as food, good for making  fences, 
and so on. This knowledge is never static, however; it is constantly  being 
expanded  through  practical   experimentation.   And the  categories into 
which  floral  reality   is divided are  clearly not  the occasionally  invisible 
Linnaean  botanical  categories  favored by  scientific   researcher^.^^ 
      The litmus test for metis  is practical success. Did the navigator make 
the trip   safely? Did Odysseus's stratagems outwit  the Cyclops? Did  the 
poultice   cure the  boil? Was the  farmer's  harvest  abundant?  If  a tech- 
nique  works  effectively  and  repeatedly  for  the  purpose  intended,  the 

341
324 THE MISSING LINK 


practitioners  of metis  do not pause long to ask why and how  it worked, 
to define the precise mechanism  of cause and effect. Their  intent  is not 
to contribute   to a  wider  body of  knowledge  but  to solve the  concrete 
problems they  face. This does not mean  that the practitioners   of metis 
do not  invent  new  solutions.  They most  decidedly  do.  Until  quite  re- 
cently virtually  all  the improvements  in agriculture  have come from  the 
field rather  than from  industry  or science. What it  does mean, however, 
is that the innovations  of metis will  typically  represent  a recombination 
(bricolage, to use Lkvi-Strauss's term)40 of existing elements; farmers did 
not invent the tractor  to  solve their problems of traction  power.41 By the 
same token, the  bricolage  of practical   knowledge  has often  produced 
complex  techniques-such     as polycropping    and soil-building    strate- 
gies-that    work  admirably  but that  science has not (yet?) understood. 
     The  power  of  practical   knowledge   depends  on  an exceptionally 
close and astute  observation  of the environment.   It  should  by now be 
rather  obvious why  traditional   cultivators   like  Squanto  are such con- 
summate observers of their  environment,   but  the reasons bear repeat- 
ing in the context of a comparison with  scientific  knowledge. First, these 
cultivators  have a vital,  direct  stake in the results  of close observation. 
Unlike  the research  scientist  or extension  agent who  does not have to 
take her  own  advice,  the  peasant  is the  immediate  consumer   of his 
own conclusions.   Unlike  the  typical  modern-day  farmer,  the  peasant 
has no outside experts to rely  on beyond his experienced  neighbors; he 
must make decisions  based on what he knows. 
     Second, the  poverty or  marginal   economic status  of many of these 
cultivators  is itself, I  would  argue, a powerful  impetus to careful  obser- 
vation  and  experimentation.    Consider  the  hypothetical   case  of two 
fishermen,  both  of  whom  must  make  their   living   from  a  river.  One 
fisherman  lives by a river  where the  catch is stable and  abundant. The 
other lives by  a river  where the catch  is variable  and sparse, affording 
only  a bare  and  precarious   subsistence. The  poorer  of  the  two  will 
clearly  have  an  immediate,   life-and-death   interest   in  devising  new 
fishing techniques,  in observing  closely the habits of fish,  in the careful 
siting  of traps  and  weirs,  in the  timing   and signs of  seasonal runs  of 
different  species, and so forth. 
     Nor  should we forget  that the  peasant cultivator  or pastoralist  lives 
year in  and year  out  in the  field  of  observation.  He or  she will   likely 
know things  that neither  an absentee cultivator  nor a research scientist 
would ever notice.42 Finally, as mentioned in the previous  chapter, such 
a cultivator  is always a member  of a community  that  serves as a living, 
oral reference  library  for  observations, practices,  and experiments-a 
body of knowledge  that an individual   could never  amass alone. 

342
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 325 


     The experimental  temper  of  "prescientific"   peoples, often  impelled 
by mortal  threats, resulted  in many  important,   efficacious discoveries. 
South American   Indians  discovered  that chewing  the  bark of  the cin- 
chona tree was an  effective remedy  for malaria,  without   knowing  that 
its active  ingredient   was quinine  or  why  it worked.   Westerners knew 
that certain  foods consumed in the early spring,  such as rhubarb,  could 
relieve the symptoms  of wintertime   scurvy, without   knowing  anything 
about Vitamin  C. The mold from  certain  breads was used to stem infec- 
tions long  before the isolation  of  ~enicillin.~~According   to Anil  Gupta, 
roughly  three-quarters   of the modern  pharmacopoeia   are derivatives 
of traditionally    known  medicines.44 Even in  the absence of remedies, 
people often  knew what  measures would   lessen their  chances of con- 
tracting  a dreaded contagious disease. The Londoners in Daniel  Defoe's 
Journal  of the Plague Year knew that  moving  to the country   or, failing 
that, sealing oneself up in  one's rooms vastly improved  one's chances of 
surviving  the  bubonic  plague of  1 66S.45 Knowing, as we now do, that 
the vectors  of the plague were  the fleas carried  by  rats, we can  appre- 
ciate why these strategies often worked,  but Defoe's contemporaries  hit 
on these effective  solutions  even though  they  thought  that  the plague 
was caused by vapors. 
     A  most  striking   illustration    of  practice   preceding   science is  the 
widespread  use of variolation  to check  the spread of smallpox  long be- 
fore Sir William   Jenner's heralded development  of vaccination  in  1798. 
The story, which  Frkdirique   Apffel  Marglin   analyzes in impressive  de- 
tail,  is valuable  because it demonstrates  how purely  metis  skills  led to 
a form   of inoculation    that  mimicked   or  presaged what  is  justifiably 
seen as a great milestone in  scientific  medicine.46 Let me make it clear 
that the last  thing I  intend here  is a defense of traditional  medicine  vis- 
a-vis modern  medical  research  and experimental  method.47 What this 
account  does highlight,   however,  is how  frequently   local knowledge, 
trial  and  error,  or what  we might  more  generously  call  the stochastic 
method  have produced practical   solutions  without  benefit  of scientific 
method. 
     By  at least the  sixteenth  century,  the technique  of  variolation   was 
widely  practiced   in  India,  the  Middle   East, Europe,   and China.  The 
practice  consisted of using  human smallpox  matter,  scratched into  the 
skin  or  inhaled,  which  gave the  recipient   a mild,  rarely   fatal  case of 
smallpox.   "Fresh"  smallpox   matter-from       the  pustules  or  scabs  of 
someone with   an active  infection   contracted   in the  usual  way-was 
never used. The inoculation  was typically  made with  attenuated  matter 
saved from  those who  had had mild  cases during  last  year's epidemic 
or  with  matter  taken from   the pustules  of those who  had been  inocu- 

343
326 THE MISSING LINK 


lated the  previous  year.  Dosage could  be regulated  according   to  the 
size and age of the patient. 
     The principle  behind  variolation,   the same principle   that forms  the 
basis of homeopathy,  reflected  a much  older  practice.   Inoculation   in 
one form or  another  was widely practiced   well before  the rise of mod- 
ern medicine.  In India,  variolation   was carried  out by ritual  specialists 
and  was  thoroughly    integrated   with    the  worship    of  the  goddess 
Sithala.48 In other societies, its  cultural  setting was no  doubt different, 
although  the actual procedures  were remarkably   parallel. 
     Jenner's discovery  of vaccination   using  cowpox  matter  was there- 
fore  not entirely   novel.  A young  girl  had  told  him  that  she was  pro- 
tected against smallpox  because she had already  had cowpox.  Jenner, 
following   this lead,  inoculated  his  own  children  with  cowpox  matter 
and observed that  they showed  no reaction  to  a subsequent smallpox 
vaccination.  Vaccination  was, of course,  a great advance over variola- 
tion.  Because it used live  smallpox matter,  variolation   induced  a mild 
but  active  case that  was contagious,   and  1 to  3 percent  of  those  so 
treated died from  the treatment,   a ratio that  nonetheless compared  fa- 
vorably  with  the one or  two  in six  who perished  in  an epidemic.  Jen- 
ner's technique used killed  virus,  thus avoiding  contagion, and  his vac- 
cination  had a remarkably  low  iatrogenic  rate:  only one in  a thousand 
died of  the vaccination   itself.   His achievement   is rightly   celebrated, 
but it  is important    to recognize  that  "Jennerian   vaccination   was not 
an abrupt  break  with  the  past, but  the direct   descendant and  heir  of 
ino~ulation."~~ 
     Variolation,   though  hardly  to  be preferred  to  vaccination,   was an 
impressive  accomplishment   of  practical   prescientific   medicine.   The 
principle   of inoculation   had long  been grasped,  and, one imagines,  a 
great many  practitioners    in affected  communities   were  trying  to  de- 
velop a successful technique. Once the efficacy  of a new treatment  was 
established, the news must have traveled  faster than  any epidemic and 
quickly  displaced  less successful  preventative  measures.  There is  no 
magic here. The ingredients  of  such practical  knowledge  are simple:  a 
pressing need  (in this  case, a matter  literally   of life  and death),  a few 
promising   leads that  worked   in  analogous  contexts  (inoculation),    a 
vast army of  freelance experimenters   willing  to  try almost  anything,50 
time to  "simmer"  (as the experimenters   and their  clients  observed the 
results of  various  stratagems through   successive epidemics),  and the 
sharing  (through   chains  of communication)    of  the  experimental   re- 
sults. As long  as it didn't   require  an electron  microscope,   it would  in 
fact be surprising   if  such a  combination   of passionate  interest,  close 
observation, large  numbers of amateur  specialists trying   different  pos- 

344
                                                                         Practical Knowledge 327 

sibilities, and the time necessary for trial and error did  not produce 
many novel solutions to practical  problems. The variolators before 
Jenner were not unlike the polycropping cultivators described by Paul 
Richards. They had devised, not just stumbled upon, something that 
worked, without quite knowing exactly why it worked. While this in- 
creased their risk of drawing false inferences from what they saw, it 
did not diminish the practical achievements of their bricolage. 
     Metis, with the premium it places on practical knowledge, experi- 
ence, and stochastic reasoning, is of course not merely the now-super- 
seded precursor of scientific knowledge. It is the mode of reasoning 
most appropriate to complex material and social tasks where the un- 
certainties are so daunting that we must trust our (experienced) intu- 
ition and feel our way. Albert Howard's description of water manage- 
ment in Japan offers an instructive example: "Erosion control in Japan 
is like'a game of chess. The forest engineer, after studying his eroding 
valley, makes his first move, locating and building one or more check 
dams. He waits to see what Nature's response is. This determines the 
forest engineer's next move, which may be another dam or two, an in- 
crease in the former dam, or the construction of side retaining walls. 
Another pause for observation, the next move is made, and so on, until 
erosion is checkmated. The operations of natural forces, such as sedi- 
mentation and re-vegetation, are guided and used to the best advan- 
tage to keep down costs and to obtain practical results. No more is at- 
tempted than Nature has already done in the region."51 The engineer in 
Howard's account recognizes implicitly that he is dealing with "an art 
of one valley." Each prudent, small step, based on prior experience, 
yields new and not completely predictable effects that become the point 
of departure for  the next step. Virtually any complex task involving 
many variables whose values and interactions cannot be accurately 
forecast belongs to this genre: building a house, repairing a car, per- 
fecting a new jet engine, surgically repairing a knee, or farming a plot 
of land.52 Where the interactions involve not just the material environ- 
ment but social interaction as well-building     and peopling new vil- 
lages or cities, organizing a revolutionary seizure of power, or collec- 
tivizing agriculture-the    mind boggles at the multitude of interactions 
and uncertainties (as distinct from calculable risks). 
     More than  thirty-five years ago, in  recognition of the  refractory 
complexity of ambitious  social policy, Charles Lindblom coined the 
memorable expression "the science of muddling through."53 The phrase 
was meant to capture the spirit of a practical approach to large-scale 
policy problems that  could not be completely understood, let alone 
comprehensively addressed. Models of public administration, Lind- 

345
328 THE MISSING LINK 


blom  complained,  implicitly    assumed  a synoptic  mastery  of a policy 
initiative,   when   in  practice,  knowledge   was  both  limited   and  frag- 
mentary,  and means could  never be  neatly separated  from  goals.  His 
characterization   of actual policy  practice  emphasized  a piecemeal ap- 
proach  of  limited   comparisons,   a sequence  of trials   and  errors  fol- 
lowed by revised trials,  reliance  on past experience, and  "disjointed  in- 
crementali~m."~~Albert   Hirschman   has made  the same point,   rather 
more  metaphorically,   by comparing   social  policy   to house  building: 
'The  architect   of social  change  can  never  have a reliable   blueprint. 
Not only  is each house he builds different  from any other  that was built 
before, but it  necessarily uses new construction  materials  and  even ex- 
periments  with  untested  principles   of stress and structure.   Therefore 
what can  be most usefully conveyed  by the builders  of one house is  an 
understanding   of the  experience  that  made it  at  all possible  to  build 
under these trying  circumstances."55 
     Taken together, Lindblom's   and Hirschman's  positions  amount  to a 
well-reasoned  strategic  retreat  from   the ambition   to comprehensive, 
rational   planning.   If we  can  make allowances   for  the social-science 
jargon, the concepts behind such terms as "bounded  rationality"  (rather 
than "synoptic  mastery")  and "satisficing"   (rather  than  "maximizing"), 
terms  invented  to  describe a  world  working   by  educated  guesswork 
and rules  of thumb,  sound very much  like  metis. 


Learning Beyond the Book 

     A step-by-step "muddling   through"   approach would  seem to be the 
only prudent   course in a field  like  erosion  management or  public  pol- 
icy implementation,    where  surprises  are all  but  guaranteed. The  fact 
that  in these cases the level of  uncertainty   and hence of potential   dis- 
aster  can be reduced  by breaking   down  the  process into  more  man- 
ageable steps does not imply   that  any novice  could  then take  charge. 
On the contrary,  only someone with  wide  experience will  be able to in- 
terpret  the results  of and  reactions  to an initial   step in order  to  deter- 
mine the  next step. One would want  hydrologists  and policy  managers 
who had  been surprised many  times and  have had many successes be- 
hind  them.  Their  repertoire  of  responses would  be larger,  their  judg- 
ment  in reading  the  environment   surer, their  sense of what  surprises 
might  await  them  more  accurate.  Once  again,  some of their   compe- 
tence could  be  interpreted   and taught,  but  much  of  it would   remain 
implicit-a      sixth sense that comes with long  practice. At the risk  of try- 
ing  to pinpoint   the  ineffable,   I want   to suggest how   important   such 
knowledge  is and how  difficult   it is to  translate  it into  codified  f0rrn.5~ 

346
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 329 


     Metis knowledge  is often so implicit   and automatic  that its bearer  is 
at a loss to explain  it.57 A staple of early medical  training,   I  have been 
told,  is the story  of a physician   who,  at the turn  of  the century,  had a 
spectacularly high  success rate in diagnosing syphilis in its  early stages. 
Laboratory  tests confirmed  his diagnoses, but  he himself did  not know 
precisely  what  it  was that  he detected  in the  physical  exams that  led 
him to his conclusions.  Intrigued  by his success, hospital administrators 
asked two other  doctors to  closely observe his examination   of patients 
over several  weeks and to  see if they  could spot  what  he was picking 
up. At long last, they and  the doctor realized  that he was unconsciously 
registering  the patients'  slight eye tremor.  The eye tremor then became 
a universally   recognized   symptom  of  syphilis.  Although   this  insight 
could  be codified,  what  is  instructive   here is  that  it  could  have been 
achieved only  through  close observation   and long  clinical  experience 
and that,  even before then, it  could  have been known subliminally. 
     Any experienced  practitioner   of  a skill  or craft  will  develop  a large 
repertoire  of  moves, visual judgments,  a sense of touch,  or a discrimi- 
nating  gestalt for  assessing the work as well  as a range of accurate  in- 
tuitions  born  of experience  that  defy being communicated   apart  from 
practice.  A few brief  examples will  help  to convey the subtlety  and nu- 
ance of this  knowledge.  In Indonesia,  older  Bugis  sea captains, sound 
asleep below  decks, will   awaken the  moment  there  is a change in  di- 
rection,   weather,  current,   or some  combination   of  the three.  As  the 
ocean's waves change amplitude   or begin  striking  the ship  from  a dif- 
ferent  direction,  a captain  immediately   senses the change through the 
resulting  slight  alterations  in  the roll  and pitch  of the  ship. 
     In  the days when a case of diphtheria   in town  was still  an occasion 
for quarantining   the patient at home, a doctor  was taking a young med- 
ical student  along with  him  on his rounds.  When they had been admit- 
ted to the  front  hall  of  a quarantined   house but before  they  had seen 
the patient,   the  older  man  paused  and said,  "Stop.  Smell  the  odor! 
Never forget  this  smell; this  is the smell  of a house with  diphtheria."58 
Another doctor  once told  me that, after seeing thousands of  infants at a 
busy clinic,  he  believed that  he could  tell  with  a high  degree of  accu- 
racy, just by looking, whether  an infant  was seriously ill  and needed im- 
mediate attention.   He couldn't   quite put  his finger  on the  exact visual 
cue that   informed   his judgment,   but  he  supposed  that  it  was  some 
combination   of complexion,  the expression of the  eyes, body tone, and 
animation.  Albert  Howard   once again makes a persuasive case for the 
"practiced   eye": "An experienced  farmer  can tell  the health  of the  soil 
and the quality   of the humus  by the plants-their      vigor,  their  growth, 
the profuse   roots,  the  'glow'  of  health.  .  . . The  same is true   for  the 

347
330 THE MISSING LINK 


health of animals  on good land."  Indeed, he continues,  "it  is not neces- 
sary to weigh  or measure  them. A glance  on the part  of the successful 
grazier,  or a butcher   accustomed  to  deal with   high  class animals,  is 
sufficient  to tell  him whether   all is well  or whether  there  is something 
wrong  with  the soil or  the management  of the animals,  or both."59 
     What  is the status of such  insight  or intuition?   We might  call these 
skills  the  "tricks  of  the trade"   (in  the nondeceptive   sense) that  most 
"crafty"  practitioners  acquire.60 Notice that virtually  all the  experienced 
judgments  described in  these anecdotes could  be verified  by tests and 
measurements. Diphtheria   can be detected  in the  laboratory,  a child's 
anemia can be verified  by blood tests, and the Bugis sea captain  can go 
on deck to  confirm  the  shift  in the  wind.  It  is doubtless  reassuring  to 
those who have  both the  intuition   and access to formal  measurement 
to know  that  their  judgment  can be checked.  But  the epistemic  alter- 
native  to metis  is far  slower,  more  laborious,  more  capital  intensive, 
and not  always  decisive. When  rapid  judgments  of high  (not  perfect) 
accuracy are called for, when it  is important  to interpret  early signs that 
things are going  well  or poorly, then  there is no substitute  for metis.  In 
the case of the experienced doctor,  in fact,  it is metis that  informs  a de- 
cision  about whether  tests are needed and, if  so, which tests. 
     Even the part  of metis that  can be conveyed by rules of thumb  is the 
codification   of  practical   experience.  The boiling   down  of  maple sap 
into  syrup is a tricky  business. If one goes too far, the sap will boil  over. 
The stopping  point   can be determined   by a thermometer   or  by a hy- 
drometer  (which  indicates  specific gravity).  But  those with  experience 
look for  the mass of small  bubbles that  forms on the  surface of the sap 
just before  it begins to boil  over-a    visual  rule of thumb  that is far  eas- 
ier  to use. Achieving  the insight,  however,  requires that,  at least once, 
the syrup  maker make a mistake  and go too far. Chinese recipes, it  has 
always amused  me, often contain  the  following  instruction:    "Heat the 
oil  until  it  is  almost  smoking." The  recipes  assume that  the cook  has 
made enough mistakes  to know what  oil  looks like just  before it begins 
smoking.  The rule  of thumb  for maple  syrup  and for oil  are, by defini- 
tion,  the rules  of experience. 
     Those who  do not have access to scientific  methods  and laboratory 
verification   have often  relied  on metis to  develop rich  knowledge  sys- 
tems that  are remarkably  accurate. Traditional   navigation  skills before 
the eras of sextants, magnetic  compasses, charts,  and sonar are a case 
in  point.  I refer  again to  the Bugis  in this  context, because their  skills 
have been  so brilliantly   documented   by Gene Ammarell.61  In the  ab- 
sence of formal  tide tables,  the Bugis have elaborated  a thoroughly  re- 
liable  scheme for  forecasting  rising   and falling  tides,  the direction   of 

348
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 33 1 


currents,  and  the  relative  strength  of  tides-all      of which   are vitally 
important   to their  sailing  plans  and safety.62 Calculating  on the basis 
of time  of day, the number   of days into  the lunar  cycle,  and the  mon- 
soon season, the Bugis captain holds in his  head a system that provides 
all the  accurate  information    he needs about  tides.  From  an astrono- 
mer's perspective,  it seems odd that the scheme makes no reference  to 
the angle of declination  of  the moon. But  since the monsoon is directly 
related to  the declination   of the  moon, it  serves effectively  as a proxy. 
The cognitive  map  of the Bugis  captain  can be reconstructed   in writ- 
ten form,  as Ammarell   has done,  for illustrative    purposes, but  it  was 
learned   orally   and  by  informal    apprenticeship    among  the   Bugis. 
Given the complexity  of  the phenomena it  is meant to address, the sys- 
tem for  evaluating   and predicting    tides is  elegantly  simple  and  emi- 
nently  effective. 


The Dynamism and Plasticity of Metis 

     The term  "traditional,"   as in "traditional   knowledgew-a   term  that  I 
have carefully   avoided-is      a  misnomer,  sending  all  the  wrong   sig- 
                     theInnal~.~~ mid-nineteenth century, explorers in West Africa stumbled 
upon groups  growing  maize,  a New World  grain,  as their main  staple. 
Although   it  was  unlikely   that  the  West Africans   had  been  growing 
maize for  longer than  two generations,  its cultivation   was already  sur- 
rounded   by elaborate   rituals   and  myths  about  a  maize  goddess or 
spirit  who had given  them the first  kernels. What was striking  was both 
the  alacrity  with   which  they  had  adopted maize  and  the  speed with 
which  they had integrated it  into their  traditions.b4 The apparent spread 
of variolation   across four continents  is a further instance of  how widely 
and  how  rapidly   "traditional    peoples" will   embrace  techniques  that 
solve vital problems.  Examples  could be multiplied.   Sewing  machines, 
matches, flashlights,  kerosene, plastic  bowls, and antibiotics   are only a 
tiny  sample  of the  products  that  solved vital   problems  or  eliminated 
great drudgery   and were thus  readily  accepted.65 Practical efficacy  is, 
as we have noted,  the key test of metis  knowledge,  and all  these prod- 
ucts passed with  flying  colors. 
     The point  that  I  am making  would  hardly  need emphasis or  elabo- 
rate illustration    except for the  fact that  a certain understanding   of sci- 
ence, modernity,   and development  has  so successfully structured   the 
dominant  discourse  that  all other  kinds  of knowledge  are regarded  as 
backward,  static  traditions,   as old wives' tales and superstitions.   High 
modernism  has needed this  "other," this dark  twin,  in  order to  rhetori- 
cally present  itself as the antidote  to                                    Theback~ardness.~~ binary oppo- 

349
332 THE MISSING LINK 


sition also comes from a history  of competition  between the institutions 
and personnel  that  sprang up  around  these two  forms  of knowledge. 
Modern research  institutions,  agricultural    experiment  stations, sellers 
of fertilizer  and  machinery, high-modernist   city  planners, Third  World 
developers, and  World  Bank  officials  have, to  a considerable  degree, 
made their  successful institutional   way  in the world   by the systematic 
denigration  of the practical   knowledge  that we have  called metis. 
     Their characterization   could not,  in this context, be further  from  the 
truth.  Metis, far  from  being rigid  and  monolithic,   is plastic,  local, and 
Itdi~ergent.~'   is in fact  the idiosyncracies  of  metis, its contextualness, 
and its fragmentation   that make it  so permeable, so open to new ideas. 
Metis has no doctrine  or centralized  training;   each practitioner  has his 
or her own  angle. In economic  terms, the  market for  metis is often one 
of nearly perfect competition,   and local monopolies  are likely to be bro- 
ken by innovation   from below  and  outside. If  a new technique  works, 
it is likely  to find  a clientele. 
     In   his   defense  of  traditionalism      against  rationalism,     Michael 
Oakeshott  emphasizes  the  pragmatism    of  real,  existing   traditions: 
"The big  mistake  of  the rationalist-though        it  is not  inherent  in  the 
method-is     to assume that  'tradition,'    or  what  is better  called  'prac- 
tical  knowledge,'  is rigid,   fixed and unchanging-in       fact it  is preem- 
inently  fluid.'       Tradition,  in  part because of its  local variation,   is pli- 
able and dynamic.  "No traditional   way  of behavior,  no traditional   skill 
ever remains  fixed," he says elsewhere. "Its  history  is one of continual 
change."69 The changes are likely to  be small  and gradual  (incremen- 
talism)  rather  than sudden  and discontinuous. 
     It  is worth   emphasizing  the  degree to  which  oral  cultures,  as op- 
posed to written  cultures,  may avoid the rigidity   of orthodoxy.  Because 
an oral  culture  has no textual  reference  point  for marking   deviations, 
its religious  myths, rituals,  and folklore  are likely  to drift.  The tales and 
traditions  currently   in circulation   vary  with  the speaker, the audience, 
and local  needs. Having no yardstick   like  a sacred text to measure the 
degree of drift  from  its Ur-tradition,    such a culture  can change greatly 
over time  and  simultaneously   think   of itself  as remaining   faithful   to 
tradition.'O 
     Perhaps  the best  analogy  for  a society's  stock  of  metis is  its  lan- 
guage. Yes, there are rules  of thumb  for  expression: cliches,  formulas 
of politeness,  customs for  swearing,  and  conventional  conversations. 
But unless  there is a central  committee   of grammarians  with   dracon- 
ian police powers, the language is always being added to as new expres- 
sions and  novel  combinations   are  invented  and  puns  and irony   un- 
dermine  old  formulas.   Under  great  pressure  and  rapid   change, the 

350
                                                                         Practical Knowledge 333 

language may change rather dramatically and new hybrids arise, but 
for the people who speak it, it remains recognizably their language. 
Influence over the direction of a language is never equally distributed, 
but innovation comes from far and wide, and if others find a particu- 
lar innovation useful or apposite, they will adopt it as part of their lan- 
guage. In language as in metis, seldom is the name of an innovator 
remembered, and this, too, helps to make the result a joint, mutual 
product. 


The Social Context of Metis and Its Destruction 

While doing fieldwork in a small village in Malaysia, I was constantly 
struck by the breadth of my neighbors' skills and their casual knowl- 
edge of local ecology. One particular anecdote is representative. Grow- 
ing in the compound of the house in which I lived was a locally famous 
mango tree. Relatives and acquaintances would visit when the fruit 
was ripe in the hope of being given a few fruits and, more important, 
the chance to save and plant the seeds next to their own house. Shortly 
before my arrival, however, the tree had become infested with large red 
ants, which destroyed most of the fruit before it could ripen. It seemed 
nothing could be done short of bagging each fruit. Several times I no- 
ticed the elderly head of household, Mat Isa, bringing dried nipah palm 
fronds to the base of the mango tree and checking them. When I finally 
got around to asking what he was up to, he explained it to me, albeit 
reluctantly, as for him this was pretty humdrum stuff compared to our 
usual gossip. He knew that small black ants, which had a number of 
colonies at the rear of the compound, were the enemies of large red 
ants. He also knew that the thin, lancelike leaves of the nipah palm 
curled into long, tight tubes when they fell from the tree and died. (In 
fact, the local people used the tubes to roll their cigarettes.) Such tubes 
would also, he knew, be ideal places for the queens of the black ant 
colonies to lay their eggs. Over several weeks he placed dried nipah 
fronds in strategic places until he had masses of black-ant eggs begin- 
ning to  hatch. He  then placed the  egg-infested fronds against the 
mango tree and observed the ensuing week-long Armageddon. Several 
neighbors, many of them skeptical, and their children followed the for- 
tunes of the ant war  closely. Although smaller by half or  more, the 
black ants finally had the weight of numbers to prevail against the red 
ants and gain possession of the ground at the base of the mango tree. 
As the black ants were not interested in the  mango leaves or fruits 
while the fruits were still on the tree, the crop was saved. 
     This successful field experiment in biological controls presupposes 

351
334 THE MISSING LINK 


several kinds  of  knowledge:  the  habitat  and  diet of  black  ants,  their 
egg-laying habits,  a guess about what  local  material  would  substitute 
as movable egg chambers, and experience with the fighting  proclivities 
of red and black  ants. Mat  Isa made it clear  that such skill  in  practical 
entomology was quite  widespread,  at least among his older  neighbors, 
and that people remembered something like this strategy having worked 
once or twice in  the past. What is clear to  me is that no agricultural   ex- 
tension official   would  have known  the first  thing  about ants, let  alone 
biological  controls;  most extension  agents were raised  in  town  and in 
any case were concerned  entirely  with   rice,  fertilizer,  and  loans. Nor 
would most of them think  to ask; they were, after all, the experts, trained 
to instruct  the peasant. It  is hard to  imagine this  knowledge being  cre- 
ated and maintained  except in the context of lifelong  observation  and a 
relatively stable, multigenerational   community that  routinely  exchanges 
and preserves knowledge  of this kind. 
     One purpose of this illustration   is to alert  us to the social conditions 
necessary for  the  reproduction   of  comparable   practical   knowledge. 
These social conditions,  at a minimum,   would  seem to require  a com- 
munity  of interest,  accumulated  information,   and ongoing experimen- 
tation.  Occasionally there are formal  institutions   that seem almost per- 
fectly tailored  to  the collection  and exchange of practical   information, 
such as the  veill&es of  nineteenth-century   France.  The veillee,   as its 
name implies,  was a traditional  pattern  of gathering  practiced  by farm 
families  during   winter  evenings,  often  in barns  to  take advantage  of 
the warmth   generated by the  livestock and  thus save on fuel.  With  no 
agenda save sociability  and  economy, the gatherings  amounted  to  lo- 
cal assemblies where opinions,  stories,  agricultural   news, advice, gos- 
sip, and  religious  or  folk tales  were exchanged while  the  participants 
shelled nuts  or  embroidered.  Given  the  fact that  each member  there 
possessed a lifetime  of  interested  observation  and  practice  in  which 
every family paid  for the consequences of its agricultural   decisions, the 
veillee was an unheralded  daily  seminar  on practical  knowledge. 
     This brings  us squarely to two  of the great ironies  of metis. The first 
is that metis is  not democratically   distributed.  Not  only does it depend 
on a touch  or a knack  that  may not  be common,  but access to the  ex- 
perience and  practice  necessary for  its acquisition   may be restricted. 
Artisan  guilds, gifted  craftsmen,  certain  classes, religious  fraternities, 
entire  communities,   and  men  in  general  often  treat   some forms   of 
knowledge as a monopoly they are reluctant  to share. Better  stated, the 
availability   of such knowledge  to others  depends greatly  on the social 
structure  of  the society  and the  advantages that  a monopoly  in  some 
forms  of knowledge  can  confer.71 In this respect  metis is  not unitary, 

352
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 335 


and we  should  perhaps  speak of  metises,  recognizing   its  nonhomo- 
geneity. The second irony  is that,  however  plastic  and receptive  metis 
is, some forms  of it  seem to  depend on  key elements of  preindustrial 
life for their  elaboration   and transmission.  Communities  that  are mar- 
ginal to  markets  and to  the  state are likely  to  retain  a high  degree of 
metis; they have  no choice,  as they have to rely  disproportionately    on 
the knowledge  and  materials  at  hand. If,  while   shopping  at the local 
store or visiting  at the  farmers' association,  Mat  Isa had found a cheap 
pesticide that would  have finished  off the red ants, I don't  doubt that  he 
would have  used it. 
     Some forms  of metis  are disappearing  every day.72 As physical mo- 
bility,  commodity  markets,  formal   education,  professional  specializa- 
tion,  and mass  media spread  to  even the  most remote  communities, 
the social conditions  for  the elaboration  of metis  are undermined.  One 
could; with  great justice,  welcome  a great many  of these extinctions  of 
local  knowledge.  Once matches become  widely  available,  why would 
anyone want to  know, except as a matter of  idle curiosity,  how to make 
fire  with  flint  and  tinder?  Knowing   how  to  scrub clothes  on  a wash- 
board  or on a stone  in the  river  is undoubtedly   an art,  but  one gladly 
abandoned by those who can afford  a washing machine.  Darning  skills 
were  similarly   lost,  without   much  nostalgia,  when  cheap,  machine- 
made stockings  came  on the  market.  As the older  Bugis  seamen say, 
"These days, with  charts and  compasses, anyone can steer."73 And why 
not?  The production    of  standardized   knowledge   has  made  certain 
skills  more broadly-more      democratically-available,       as they  are no 
longer  the preserve of a guild  that  may refuse admission  or  insist on a 
long apprenti~eship.~~ Much  of the world   of metis  that we have lost  is 
the  all  but  inevitable   result  of  industrialization     and  the  division   of 
labor. And  much of  this loss was  experienced  as a liberation  from  toil 
and drudgery. 
     But  it  would  be  a serious  error   to believe  that  the destruction   of 
metis  was merely   the inadvertent    and necessary  by-product   of  eco- 
nomic  progress. The destruction   of metis and  its replacement  by stan- 
dardized  formulas  legible only  from  the center is virtually   inscribed  in 
the activities  of both  the state and large-scale bureaucratic   capitalism. 
As a "project," it  is the object of constant  initiatives  which  are never en- 
tirely  successful, for  no forms  of production   or social life  can be made 
to work  by formulas  alone-that     is, without  metis. The logic animating 
the project,  however, is one of control  and appropriation.   Local  knowl- 
edge, because it is dispersed  and relatively   autonomous,  is all  but un- 
a~propriable.   The reduction   or, more  utopian  still,  the elimination    of 
metis  and the local  control   it entails  are preconditions,    in the  case of 

353
336 THE MISSING LINK 


the state, of administrative    order  and fiscal  appropriation   and,  in the 
case of the large capitalist  firm,  of worker   discipline  and profit. 
     The subordination   of metis  is fairly   obvious in  the development  of 
mass production in the factory. A comparable de-skilling  process is, I be- 
lieve, more compelling  and, given the  intractable  obstacles to complete 
standardization,  ultimately  less successful in agricultural  production. 
     As Stephen Marglin's  early work  has convincingly  shown,  capitalist 
profit  requires not only  efficiency but  the combination  of efficiency  and 
control.75 The crucial   innovations  of  the division   of labor   at the sub- 
product  level and the concentration   of production  in  the factory repre- 
sent the key steps in bringing   the labor  process under  unitary  control. 
Efficiency  and control  might coincide,  as in the case of the mechanized 
spinning  and weaving  of cotton.  At times,  however,  they might  be un- 
related  or  even contradictory.    "Efficiency   at best  creates a potential 
profit,"  notes  Marglin.   "Without   control  the  capitalist   cannot  realize 
that profit.  Thus organizational  forms  which  enhance capitalist  control 
may increase  profits  and find  favor  with  capitalists  even if  they affect 
productivity   and efficiency  adversely.  Conversely, more efficient   ways 
of organizing  production   which   reduce capitalist   control  may end  up 
reducing  profits  and being  rejected by  capitalist^."^^ The typical  struc- 
ture of artisanal  production   was often an impediment  to efficiency.  But 
it was  nearly  always an  obstacle to  capitalist  profits.   In  the "putting- 
out"  system in textiles  that prevailed  before  factory  organization,   cot- 
tage workers  had control   over the raw  material,   could  set the pace of 
the work,   and could  increase their   return  by various  stratagems  that 
were difficult  to  monitor. The crucial  advantage  of the factory, from  the 
boss's point of view,  was that he could  more  directly  fix  the hours  and 
the intensity  of the work  and control  the raw   material^.^' To the degree 
that  efficient  production  could  still  be organized  on an  artisanal  basis 
(such as early woolen  manufacturing   and silk ribbon  weaving,  accord- 
ing  to Marglin),   to that  degree was  it difficult   for  the capitalist   to ap- 
propriate  the  profits  of a dispersed craft  population. 
     The  genius  of modern  mass-production    methods,  Frederick   Tay- 
lor,  saw the  issue of destroying   metis and  turning   a resistant,  quasi- 
autonomous,  artisan  population   into  more  suitable  units,  or  "factory 
hands," with  great  clarity.  "Under  scientific  management.   . . the man- 
agers assume . . . the burden of gathering  together  all of the traditional 
knowledge  which  in the  past has been possessed by the workmen  and 
then  of classifying,  tabulating,   and  reducing  this  knowledge  to rules, 
laws,  formulae.  . . . Thus  all of  the planning  which   under  the old sys- 
tem was  done by the  workmen,  must  of  necessity under  the new  sys- 
tem be done by  management in  accordance with  the  law of science."78 

354
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 33 7 


In the Taylorized  factory, only  the factory  manager  had the knowledge 
and command  of  the whole  process,  and  the worker  was  reduced  to 
the execution of  a small, often  minute,  part  of the overall  process. The 
result was often remarkably   efficient,  as in the early Ford plants;  it was 
always, however, a great  boon to control   and profit.79 
     The utopian  dream  of Taylorization-a     factory  in  which  every pair 
of hands  was more  or  less reduced  to automatic   movements,  on  the 
model  of programmed   robots-was      unrealizable.   Not  that  it  wasn't 
tried.  David Noble  has described the well-funded  attempt  to make  ma- 
chine tools  through  numerical   controls  because it promised   "emanci- 
pation  from  the human  worker."80 Its  ultimate  failure   came precisely 
because the  system  had  designed  out   metis-the     practical    adjust- 
ments  that  an  experienced  worker   would   make  to  compensate  for 
slight changes in  material,  temperatures,  the  wear on or  irregularities 
in the machine,  mechanical  malfunction,   and so forth. As one operator 
said, "Numerical    controls  are  supposed to  be like  magic, but  all  you 
can do automatically  is produce  scrap."81 This conclusion could be gen- 
eralized. In  a brilliant  ethnography  of the work  routines  of machine op- 
erators  whose jobs appeared  to have been thoroughly   de-skilled,  Ken 
Kusterer  has shown  how the  workers  nevertheless had  to develop  in- 
dividual  skills  that were  absolutely necessary to  successful production 
but that  could  never  be reduced  to  formulas  a novice  could  immedi- 
ately use. One machine operator, whose job was classified as "unskilled," 
drew  an analogy between  performing   his job  and driving  a car:  "Cars 
are basically the same but every  car is different.  . . . At first when you're 
learning,  you  just  learn  rules  about  driving.   But  as you  get to  know 
how  to  drive,  you  get  a feel  for  the  car  you're  driving-you       know, 
things  like how  it  feels at different   speeds, how well  the brakes  work, 
when  it's going  to overheat,  how  to start  it  when it's  cold.  . . . Then if 
you think  about old  cars like these machines, been running   three shifts 
for  twenty  years,  some of them,  like  maybe  you've got  a car  with  no 
horn,  that  wants to  turn  right  when  you hit  the brake,  that don't  start 
right  unless you  pump  the gas in  a certain  way-then     maybe you  see 
what  it's like trying  to run  these old machines they've  got down here."82 
     Taylorization   has its analogue in agricultural   production   as well, an 
analogue with  a far longer  and more variegated  history.  In agriculture, 
as in manufacturing,   the mere  efficiency of  a form of production   is not 
sufficient  to  ensure the appropriation    of taxes or profits.   Independent 
smallholder   agriculture   may,  as we have noted,  be the  most efficient 
way to  grow many  crops. But  such forms of  agriculture,  although  they 
may  present possibilities   for  taxation  and  profit  when  their  products 
are  bulked,  processed,  and  sold,  are relatively   illegible   and  hard  to 

355
338 THE MISSING LINK 


control.  As is the  case with  autonomous  artisans  and petit-bourgeois 
shopkeepers, monitoring  the commercial   fortunes of small-fry  farms  is 
an administrative   nightmare.   The possibilities   for  evasion  and resis- 
tance are numerous, and the cost of procuring   accurate, annual  data is 
high, if  not prohibiti~e.~~ 
     A state mainly  concerned  with  appropriation    and control  will   find 
sedentary agriculture  preferable  to pastoralism  or  shirting agriculture. 
For the same reasons, such a state would generally prefer  largeholding 
to smallholding  and, in turn, plantation  or  collective agriculture  to both. 
Where control   and  appropriation   are  the  overriding   considerations, 
only the last  two forms  offer  direct  control  over  the workforce   and its 
income,  the opportunity    to select  cropping  patterns   and techniques, 
and, finally,  direct  control  over the  production  and  profit  of the enter- 
prise. Although  collectivization   and  plantation  agriculture   are seldom 
very efficient,   they  represent,  as we have  seen, the most  legible  and 
hence appropriable  forms  of agriculture. 
     The large  capitalist  agricultural    producer  faces the  same problem 
as the  factory  owner:   how  to transform    the  essentially  artisanal   or 
metis knowledge  of farmers  into a standardized  system that  will  allow 
him  greater  control   over  the  work  and  its  intensity.  The  plantation 
was one solution.  In  colonial  countries,   where able-bodied  men  were 
pressed into  service as gang  labor, the  plantation   represented  a kind 
of private  collectivization,   inasmuch  as it relied  on the state for the ex- 
tramarket   sanctions  necessary to  control   its  labor  force.  More  than 
one plantation  sector has made up what  it lacked  in efficiency by using 
its political    clout  to secure  subsidies,  price  supports,  and  monopoly 
privileges. 
     The control  made possible by the plantation,  not  to mention the  col- 
lective farm,  has proved, with  few  exceptions, to entail  such high costs 
in  supervision,  rigidity,   and  overhead  as to  be inefficient.    Now  that 
plantation   agriculture   has been discredited,  some of  the newer  alter- 
natives  devised  to  replicate   its  control   and standardization    are  in- 
structive,  as they indicate  the functional  similarity   that  may lie behind 
different  forms.84 The invention  of contract   farming  worldwide   is just 
one noteworthy  example.85 When chicken  farmers  realized  that huge, 
centralized  operations   for raising   fryers not  only  were inefficient   but 
posed serious  disease  and  environmental   problems,   they  devised  a 
kind  of high-tech  putting-out  system.86 The large firm contracts  with  a 
farmer  to supply him  with  chicks and then  to buy back (after  six weeks 
or so) a certain number of chickens meeting their  standards. The farmer, 
for  his part,  is obliged  to  construct  and pay  for  a building  that  meets 
corporate  specifications  and to feed, water,  and medicate the chickens 

356
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 339 


with rations  supplied  by the corporation  and according  to their  precise 
timetable.  An inspector  frequently  verifies  compliance.  For the  corpo- 
ration,  the advantages are enormous:  it risks  no capital  except what  is 
invested in  the birds;  it  needs no land  of its  own;  its management  ex- 
penses are small; it achieves uniform  product  standards; and, not least, 
it  can fail   to  renew  a contract   or  change  the  price  paid  after   each 
round  at no cost to itself. 
     The logic,  although  not  the form,  is the same  as on the plantation. 
Given its  national   or  international   market,  what  the  corporation   re- 
quires is absolute,  guaranteed uniformity    of product  and a stable  sup- 
ply.87 The need to administer the production  of uniform   fryers in  many 
different  localities   requires  an optic  of  standardization   and  aggrega- 
tion.  As we saw  in the  case of scientific   forestry,  this  is not  merely  a 
question of  inventing  measures that  accurately  reflect the  facts on the 
ground  and that  can be conveyed  to administrators.   It  is, above all,  a 
question of changing  the environment  so that it is more standardized  to 
begin with.  Only the standardized breeding,  the building  constructed  to 
specifications,  the  fixed formula   for  feed, and the  mandatory  feeding 
schedule-all     disciplined   by the contract-make      it possible  for  a sin- 
gle specialist  to  inspect one hundred   poultry  farms  raising  fryers  for, 
say, Kentucky Fried  Chicken,  and to  ensure that the  variation  is  mini- 
mal.  One can  visualize  his handy  checklist.   The purpose  of  contract 
farming  is  not to  understand  farms  and adapt  to them;  rather,  it is  to 
transform  farms  and farm  labor at the  outset so that they fit  the grid  of 
the contract. 
     For  farmers  who  sign up,  as long as the contracts   are rolled   over, 
there  are profits  to  be made,  although  at considerable   risk. The  con- 
tracts  are short  term, the  work  schedules detailed,  and the set-up  and 
supplies mandatory.  The contract  farmers  are in theory  small-business 
entrepreneurs, but  aside from the fact that they risk their land  and build- 
ings, they have not  much more  control  over their  working   day than do 
assembly-line  workers. 


The Case Against   Imperial    Knowledge 

     They said . . . that he was so devoted to Pure Science . . . that he would rather 
     have people die by the right therapy than be cured by the wrong. 
     -Sinclair   Lewis, Arrowsmith 

The  argument  that  I  have been  venturing   is not  a case against  high 
modernism   or state simplifications    per se or, to  be sure, against  epis- 
temic  knowledge per se. Our ideas about citizenship,  public-health  pro- 

357
340 THE MISSING LINK 


grams, social security,  transportation,   communication,   universal  pub- 
lic education,  and equality  before the law  are all powerfully   influenced 
by state-created, high-modernist    simplifications.   I will   go further  and 
say that the  initial   land reforms   in Bolshevik  Russia  and in postrevo- 
lutionary  China  were  state-abetted simplifications    that  effectively  en- 
franchised millions  who  had lived in  virtual  serfdom. Epistemic  knowl- 
edge, though never separate in its practice  from  metis, has provided  us 
with  a knowledge of the world   that, for  all its  darker  aspects, few of us 
would want  to  surrender. 
     What  has proved  to  be truly  dangerous  to  us and  to our  environ- 
ment, I think,  is the combination   of the universalist  pretensions of epis- 
temic knowledge and authoritarian   social engineering. Such a combina- 
tion  has been at  work  in  city  planning,   in  Lenin's view  of  revolution 
(but not his practice),  in  collectivization   in the Soviet Union,  and in vil- 
lagization  in  Tanzania. The combination   is implicit   in  the logic  of sci- 
entific  agriculture   and explicit   in its colonial   practice.  When schemes 
like these come close to achieving  their  impossible  dreams of ignoring 
or suppressing  metis  and local  variation,   they all  but  guarantee their 
own practical   failure. 
     Universalist   claims  seem inherent   in the  way in  which  rationalist 
knowledge  is pursued.   Although  I  am  no philosopher   of knowledge, 
there seems to be no door in this epistemic  edifice through  which  metis 
or practical   knowledge  could  enter on its  own terms.  It  is this imperi- 
alism that  is troubling.  As Pascal wrote, the  great failure  of rationalism 
is "not  its recognition   of technical   knowledge,  but its failure   to recog- 
nize any other."88 By contrast, metis does not put all  its eggs in one bas- 
ket; it  makes no claim to universality   and in  this sense is pluralistic.  Of 
course, certain structural   conditions  can thwart  this imperialism  of epi- 
stemic claims. Democratic  and commercial  pressures sometimes oblige 
agricultural   scientists  to premise  their  work  on practical   problems  as 
defined by farmers.  During  the Meiji  Restoration,  three-person  techni- 
cal teams began by investigating   farmers'  innovations  and then  taking 
them back to  the laboratory  to perfect  them. The construction  workers 
who  refused to  leave Brasilia   as planned  or the  disillusioned  ujamaa 
villagers   who  fled from   their   settlements  to  some degree  undid  the 
plans made for them.  Such resistance, however, comes from outside the 
paradigm   of  epistemic  knowledge   itself.  When  someone like   Albert 
Howard,   himself  a meticulous  scientist,  recognizes  the "art"   of farm- 
ing  and  the  nonquantifiable   ways  of  knowing,   he  steps outside  the 
realm  of codified,  scientific  knowledge. 
     Authoritarian    high-modernist    states  in  the  grip  of  a self-evident 
(and usually  half-baked)  social  theory  have done  irreparable  damage 

358
                                                                                Practical Knowledge 34 1 


to human   communities   and  individual   livelihoods.   The  danger  was 
compounded when  leaders came to believe,  as Mao said, that  the peo- 
ple were a "blank piece of paper"  on which the new  regime could write. 
The utopian industrialist   Robert  Owen had the same vision  for the fac- 
tory town  New  Lanark,  although  on a civic  rather  than national  level: 
"Each generation, indeed each administration,   shall see unrolled before 
it the  blank  sheet of  infinite   possibility,   and if  by  chance this  tabula 
rasa had been defaced by the irrational   scribblings  of tradition-ridden 
ancestors,  then  the  first  task  of  the  rationalist    must  be to  scrub   it 
clean."89 
     What  conservatives like  Oakeshott  miss, I  think,  is that  high  mod- 
ernism has a natural  appeal for an intelligentsia   and a people who may 
have ample reason  to hold  the past in  contempt.90 Late colonial  mod- 
ernizers  sometimes wielded  their  power   ruthlessly  in transforming    a 
population   that  they took  to  be backward   and greatly   in need  of in- 
struction.  Revolutionaries  have had every reason to  despise the feudal, 
poverty-stricken,   inegalitarian   past that  they hoped to  banish forever, 
and sometimes they  have also had a reason to  suspect that immediate 
democracy  would  simply  bring  back the old  order.  Postindependence 
leaders in the  nonindustrial   world  (occasionally  revolutionary   leaders 
themselves) could not  be faulted  for hating  their  past of colonial   dom- 
ination  and economic stagnation,  nor  could they be faulted  for wasting 
no time  or  democratic   sentimentality   on  creating  a people  that  they 
could  be proud  of. Understanding   the history   and logic  of their   com- 
mitment  to high-modernist   goals, however, does not permit  us to over- 
look the  enormous damage  that their  convictions   entailed when  com- 
bined with  authoritarian    state power. 

359
10         Conclusion 


    They would reconstruct society on an imaginary plan, much like the astron- 
    omers for their own calculation would make over the system of the universe. 
    -Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, on the utopian socialists 

    Yet a man who uses an imaginary map, thinking that it is a true one, is likely 
    to be worse off than someone with no map at all; for he will fail to inquire 
    whenever he can, to observe every detail on his way, and to search continu- 
    ously with all his senses and all his intelligence for indications of where he 
    should go. 
    -E.   F. Schumacher, Small Is Beautiful 





The great high-modernist episodes that we have examined qualify as 
tragedies in at least two respects. First, the visionary intellectuals and 
planners behind them were guilty  of hubris, of forgetting  that they 
were mortals and acting as if they were gods. Second, their actions, far 
from being cynical grabs for power and wealth, were animated by a 
genuine desire to improve the human condition-a desire with a fatal 
flaw. That these tragedies could be so intimately associated with opti- 
mistic views of progress and rational order is in itself a reason for a 
searching diagnosis. Another reason lies in the completely ecumenical 
character of the high-modernist faith. We encounter it in various guises 
in colonial development schemes, planned urban centers in both the 
East and the West, collectivized farms, the large development plans of 
the World Bank, the resettlement of nomadic populations, and the man- 
agement of workers on factory floors. 
     If such schemes have typically taken their most destructive human 
and natural toll in the states of the former socialist bloc and in revo- 
lutionary Third  World settings, that is surely because there authori- 
tarian state power, unimpeded by representative institutions, could 
nullify resistance and push ahead. The ideas behind them, however, on 
which their legitimacy and appeal depended, were thoroughly West- 
ern. Order and harmony that once seemed the function of a unitary 
God had been replaced by a similar faith in the idea of progress vouch- 
safed by scientists, engineers, and planners. Their power, it is worth re- 
membering, was least contested at those moments when other forms 
of coordination had failed or seemed utterly inadequate to the great 

360
                                                                                             Conclusion 343 


tasks at hand: in  times of war, revolution,   economic  collapse, or newly 
won independence.  The plans  that  they hatched  bore a family  resem- 
blance to the  schemes of legibility   and standardization   devised by the 
absolutist kings  of the seventeenth and eighteenth  centuries. What was 
wholly   new, however,  was  the  magnitude   of both  the  plans  for   the 
wholesale transformation    of society  and the  instruments  of statecraft 
-censuses,   cadastral maps, identity  cards, statistical  bureaus, schools, 
mass media, internal   security  apparatuses-   that  could take  them far- 
ther  along  this  road   than  any  seventeenth-century   monarch  would 
have dreamed. Thus it has happened that so many of the twentieth  cen- 
tury's political   tragedies have flown  the banner  of progress, emancipa- 
tion,  and reform. 
     We have examined  in considerable   detail how  these schemes have 
failed their  intended  beneficiaries.  If  I were asked to condense the rea- 
sons behind  these failures  into  a single sentence, I  would  say that the 
progenitors   of  such  plans  regarded   themselves  as far  smarter   and 
farseeing than  they  really  were and,  at the same time,  regarded  their 
subjects as far more stupid  and incompetent  than  they really were. The 
remainder  of this chapter  is devoted to expanding  on this cursory judg- 
ment and  advancing a few  modest lessons. 


"It's   Ignorance,   Stupid!" 

    The mistake of our ancestors was to think that they were "the last number," but 
    since numbers are infinite, they could not be the last number. 
     -Eugene  Zamiatin, We 

The maxim   that  serves as the  heading  for  this  section  is  not simply 
suitable for  bumper  stickers  mimicking  the  insider  slogan of Bill  Clin- 
ton's 1992 presidential  campaign, "It's  the economy, stupid!" It  is meant 
to  call  attention   to  how  routinely   planners   ignore   the radical   con- 
tingency  of the future.  How  rare it  is to encounter  advice about  the fu- 
ture which  begins from  a premise of incomplete  knowledge.  One small 
exception-a     circular    on nutrition    published  by  the health   clinic  at 
Yale University,  where  I  teach-will      underscore  its  rarity.  Normally, 
such circulars   explain  the major  food  groups, vitamins,   and minerals 
known  to be essential for balanced nutrition   and advise a diet based on 
these categories.  This circular,   however, noted  that many  new, essen- 
tial  elements of  proper  nutrition   had  been discovered  in the past  two 
decades and that many more  elements will  presumably be identified  by 
researchers  in the decades ahead. Therefore,  on the basis ofwhat   they 
did not  know, the writers   of this piece  recommended  that one's diet be 

361
344 THE MISSING LINK 


as varied as possible, on the prudent  assumption  that  it would  contain 
many of these yet unidentified   essentials. 
     Social  and historical   analyses have, almost  inevitably,  the effect of 
diminishing   the  contingency   of human   affairs.  A historical   event  or 
state of affairs  simply is  the way it  is, often  appearing determined  and 
necessary when in fact  it might  easily have turned  out to be otherwise. 
Even a probabilistic  social science, however  careful it  may be about es- 
tablishing  ranges of outcomes, is apt to treat these probabilities,   for the 
sake of analysis, as solid facts. When  it comes to  betting  on the future, 
the contingency   is obvious,  but so is  the capacity  of human   actors to 
influence  this contingency   and help  to shape the  future.  And in  those 
cases where the bettors thought  that  they knew the  shape of the future 
by virtue of their  grasp of historical   laws of progress  or scientific  truth, 
whatever  awareness they  retained  of  the contingency   seemed to dis- 
solve before their  faith. 
     And yet  each of these schemes, as might  also have been predicted, 
was largely  undone  by  a host  of  contingencies  beyond  the planners' 
grasp. The scope and comprehensiveness of their  plans were  such that 
they would  have  had indeterminate   outcomes  even if  their  historical 
laws and the  attendant  specification  of variables  and calculations   had 
been correct. Their temporal  ambitions  meant that although they might, 
with   some confidence,   guess the  immediate   consequences  of  their 
moves, no one could  specify, let  alone calculate,  the  second- or third- 
order  consequences  or  their   interaction    effects.  The  wild   cards  in 
their  deck, however, were  the human  and natural   events outside their 
models-droughts,     wars,  revolts, epidemics,  interest rates, world   con- 
sumer prices,  oil embargoes. They could  and did,  of course, attempt  to 
adjust  and improvise  in  the face of  these contingencies.  But  the mag- 
nitude  of their  initial  intervention   was so great that  many of their  mis- 
steps could not be righted.  Stephen Marglin   has put their  problem suc- 
cinctly:   If   "the  only  certainty   about  the  future   is that   the future   is 
uncertain,  if  the only sure thing  is that  we are in  for surprises,  then no 
amount  of planning,  no amount  of prescription,   can deal with  the con- 
tingencies  that the future  will   reveal."' 
     There  is a curiously  resounding  unanimity   on this point,  and on no 
others,  between such  right-wing   critics   of the  command  economy as 
Friedrich   Hayek and  such left-wing  critics   of Communist  authoritari- 
anism  as Prince  Peter  Kropotkin,   who  declared,   "It  is impossible  to 
legislate  for the future."  Both  had a great  deal of respect  for the diver- 
sity  of human  actions  and the  insurmountable   difficulties   in  success- 
fully  coordinating   millions   of  transactions.  In  a blistering   critique   of 
failed  development paradigms,  Albert  Hirschman   made a comparable 

362
                                                                                             Conclusion 345 


case, calling  for   "a little   more  'reverence  for  life,'  a  little  less strait- 
jacketing  of  the future,   a little  more  allowance  for  the  unexpected- 
and a little  less wishful  thinking.'I2 
     One might,  on the  basis of experience,  derive a few  rules of thumb 
that,  if observed, could  make development  planning   less prone to dis- 
aster. While  my main  goal  is hardly  a point-by-point    reform  of devel- 
opment practice,  such  rules would  surely include  something  along the 
following   lines. 
     Take small steps. In an experimental approach  to social change, pre- 
sume that we cannot know  the consequences of our interventions  in ad- 
vance. Given  this postulate  of  ignorance,  prefer  wherever  possible  to 
take  a small  step, stand  back, observe,  and then  plan  the  next  small 
move. As the  biologist  J. B.  S. Haldane  metaphorically   described  the 
advantages  of smallness:  "You  can drop   a mouse down   a thousand- 
yard  mineshaft;  and  on arriving   at  the bottom,   it  gets a slight  shock 
and walks  away. A rat is killed,  a man  broken, a horse  ~plashes."~ 
     Favor reversibility.  Prefer  interventions  that  can easily be undone  if 
they turn  out  to be  mistake^.^ Irreversible   interventions   have irrever- 
sible  consequence^.^ Interventions  into  ecosystems require  particular 
care in this  respect, given our great  ignorance about  how they interact. 
Aldo Leopold  captured  the spirit  of  caution  required:  "The first  rule  of 
intelligent   tinkering  is to  keep all the parts."' 
     Plan  on surprises. Choose plans that allow  the  largest accommoda- 
tion  to the unforeseen.  In  agricultural   schemes this  may mean  choos- 
ing  and  preparing   land  so that  it  can grow   any of  several  crops.  In 
planning  housing,  it  would  mean  "designing  in" flexibility    for accom- 
modating  changes  in family   structures  or  living  styles. In  a factory  it 
may  mean selecting  a location,  layout,  or  piece of  machinery  that  al- 
lows for  new processes, materials,  or  product  lines down  the road. 
     Plan  on  human  inventiveness. Always  plan  under  the  assumption 
that  those who  become involved   in the  project  later  will  have  or will 
develop the  experience and insight  to  improve  on the design. 


Planning   for  Abstract   Citizens 

The  power  and  precision   of  high-modernist   schemes  depended  not 
only  on bracketing  contingency  but  also on standardizing   the subjects 
of development.  Some standardization  was implicit   even in the noblest 
goals of  the planners.  The great  majority   of them  were strongly   com- 
mitted  to  a more  egalitarian  society, to  meeting  the basic  needs of its 
citizens  (especially  the working  class), and to  making  the amenities  of 
a modern  society available  to all. 

363
346 THE MISSING LINK 


     Let  us pause, however,  to consider  the  kind  of  human subject  for 
whom all  these benefits were  being provided.   This subject  was singu- 
larly  abstract.  Figures as diverse  as Le Corbusier,  Walther  Rathenau, 
the collectivizers  of  the Soviet Union,   and even Julius Nyerere  (for  all 
his rhetorical    attention  to  African   traditions)   were  planning   for  ge- 
neric subjects who  needed so many square feet of housing space, acres 
of farmland,   liters  of clean  water,  and units  of  transportation   and  so 
much  food,  fresh  air, and  recreational    space. Standardized   citizens 
were uniform   in their  needs and  even interchangeable.   What is strik- 
ing, of  course, is that  such  subjects-like     the  "unmarked  citizens"   of 
liberal  theory-have,      for  the  purposes  of  the  planning  exercise,  no 
gender, no tastes, no history,  no values,  no opinions  or  original  ideas, 
no traditions,   and no distinctive   personalities   to contribute   to the en- 
terprise.  They have none of the particular,   situated,  and contextual  at- 
tributes that  one would expect of  any population  and that we, as a mat- 
ter of course,  always attribute  to  elites. 
     The lack  of  context  and particularity    is  not  an oversight;  it  is  the 
necessary first premise  of any large-scale planning   exercise. To the de- 
gree that the  subjects can be treated  as standardized  units,  the power 
of resolution   in  the  planning  exercise  is  enhanced.  Questions posed 
within  these strict   confines can  have definitive,  quantitative   answers. 
The same logic applies to the transformation  of the natural world.  Ques- 
tions  about the  volume  of commercial   wood  or  the yield  of  wheat in 
bushels permit   more  precise  calculations   than  questions  about,  say, 
the quality  of the soil,  the versatility  and  taste of the grain,  or the well- 
being of the  c~mmunity.~The  discipline   of economics achieves its  for- 
midable  resolving   power  by  transforming   what   might  otherwise   be 
considered  qualitative   matters  into   quantitative   issues with  a  single 
metric  and, as it were,  a bottom  line: profit  or  10~s.~ Providing one un- 
derstands  the heroic   assumptions  required  to  achieve  this  precision 
and the questions  that it  cannot answer, the  single metric  is an invalu- 
able tool.  Problems arise only  when  it becomes hegemonic. 
     What  is perhaps  most striking   about  high-modernist   schemes, de- 
spite  their  quite  genuine  egalitarian   and  often  socialist   impulses,  is 
how little  confidence  they repose in  the skills, intelligence,   and experi- 
ence of ordinary   people.  This is clear  enough  in the  Taylorist  factory, 
where  the logic  of  work  organization   is  to reduce  the factory   hands' 
contribution   to  a series of repetitive,   if practiced,   movements-oper- 
ations  as machinelike  as possible.  But  it  is also clear  in  collectivized 
farms,  ujamaa  villages,  and planned   cities, where  the  movements  of 
the populace  have  been to a  large degree  inscribed  in  the designs  of 
these communities.  If  Nyerere's aspirations  for cooperative  state farm- 

364
                                                                                             Conclusion 347 


ing were frustrated,  it  was not because the plans had failed to integrate 
a scheme of cooperative labor. The more ambitious   and meticulous  the 
plan, the less is left,  theoretically,  to  chance and to  local initiative   and 
experience. 


Stripping    Reality  to  Its  Essentials 

    The quantitative technologies used to investigate social and economic life 
    work best if the world they aim to describe can be remade in their image. 
     -Theodore M. Porter, Trust in Numbers 

     If the facts-that is, the behavior of living human beings-are recalcitrant to 
     such an experiment, the experimenter becomes annoyed and tries to alter the 
     facts to fit the theory, which, in practice, means a kind of vivisection of soci- 
     eties until they become what the theory originally declared that the experi- 
     ment should have caused them to be. 
     -Isaiah   Berlin, "On Political Judgment" 

The clarity  of the high-modernist   optic is due to its  resolute singularity. 
Its  simplifying   fiction   is  that,  for  any activity   or  process that  comes 
under  its  scrutiny,  there  is only  one  thing  going  on.  In the  scientific 
forest there  is only commercial   wood being  grown;  in the planned  city 
there is  only the  efficient  movement of  goods and people;  in the hous- 
ing  estate there  is only  the effective  delivery  of  shelter, heat,  sewage, 
and water;  in  the planned  hospital  there  is only  the swift  provision   of 
professional  medical  services. And yet both  we and the planners  know 
that  each of these sites  is the intersection   of  a host of interconnected 
activities   that  defy such  simple  descriptions.   Even something   as ap- 
parently   monofunctional   as a road  from  A to  B can at  the same time 
function   as a site  for  leisure,  social  intercourse,   exciting  diversions, 
and enjoying  the view  between A and B.9 
      For any such site,  it is helpful  to  imagine  two different   maps of ac- 
tivity.  In  the case of a planned urban  neighborhood,  the  first map  con- 
sists of a representation  of  the streets and buildings,  tracing  the routes 
that  the  planners   have provided   for  the  movements  between  work- 
places and  residences,  the delivery  of goods,  access to shopping,  and 
so on.  The second map  consists of  tracings,  as in a time-lapse  photo- 
graph,  of all the unplanned movements-pushing     a baby carriage,  win- 
dow  shopping, strolling,  going  to see a friend, playing hopscotch  on the 
sidewalk,  walking   the  dog, watching  the  passing scene, taking  short- 
cuts  between work   and home,  and so on.  This second map,  far  more 
complex  than  the  first,  reveals  very different   patterns  of  circulation. 
The older  the neighborhood,   the more  likely  that  the second map will 
have nearly  superseded the first, in roughly  the same way that planned, 

365
348 THE MISSING LINK 


suburban Levittowns   have, after fifty  years, become thoroughly   differ- 
ent settings from  what  their  designers envisioned. 
     If  our inquiry   has taught us  anything,  it is that  the first  map, taken 
alone, is  misrepresentative   and  indeed  nonsustainable.  A  same-age, 
monocropped  forest  with  all  the  debris  cleared  is in the  long  run  an 
ecological disaster. No Taylorist factory  can sustain production   without 
the unplanned  improvisations    of an  experienced  workforce.  Planned 
Brasilia  is,  in a thousand  ways,  underwritten   by  unplanned  Brasilia. 
Without  at least some of the  diversity  identified  by Jacobs, a stripped- 
down public  housing project  (like  Pruitt-Igoe  in  Saint Louis  or Cabrini 
Green  in  Chicago)  will   fail  its  residents.   Even  for  the  limited   pur- 
poses of  a  myopic   plan-commercial       timber,   factory   output-the 
one-dimensional   map will   simply  not  do. As with   industrial   agricul- 
ture  and its  dependency  on landraces,   the first  map  is possible  only 
because of processes lying  outside its  parameters,  which  it ignores  at 
its peril. 
     Our inquiry   has also taught us that  such maps of legibility   and con- 
trol,  especially  when   they  are backed  by  an  authoritarian    state, do 
partly succeed in shaping the natural  and social environment  after their 
image. To the degree that such thin  maps  do manage to impress them- 
selves on social life,  what  kind  of people do they  foster? Here  I would 
argue that just  as the monocropped,  same-age forest represents an im- 
poverished and unsustainable  ecosystem, so the high-modernist  urban 
complex represents  an impoverished  and unsustainable  social system. 
     Human  resistance to the more  severe forms of social straitjacketing 
prevents monotonic  schemes of centralized  rationality   from ever being 
realized.  Had  they  been realized   in their   austere  forms,  they would 
have represented a very  bleak human  prospect.  One of Le Corbusier's 
plans, for  example,  called  for the  segregation  of factory  workers   and 
their families  in barracks along the major  transportation  arteries.  It was 
a theoretically    efficient    solution   to  transportation    and  production 
problems.  If it  had been imposed, the  result would  have been a dispir- 
iting  environment   of  regimented  work   and residence  without   any of 
the animation   of town  life.  This  plan  had all  the charm  of  a Taylorist 
scheme where, using  a comparable  logic,  the efficient  organization   of 
work  was  achieved  by  confining   the  workers'   movements  to  a  few 
repetitive  gestures. The cookie-cutter  design principles  behind  the lay- 
out of the  Soviet collective   farm,  the ujamaa  village,  or the Ethiopian 
resettlement   betray  the  same  narrowness  of  vision.   They  were  de- 
signed, above all, to facilitate   the central  administration   of production 
and the control  of  public  life. 

366
                                                                                             Conclusion 349 


     Almost all  strictly  functional,  single-purpose  institutions   have some 
of the  qualities   of  sensory-deprivation    tanks  used for   experimental 
purposes. At the  limit,   they approach  the  great social  control   institu- 
tions of the eighteenth  and nineteenth centuries:  asylums, workhouses, 
prisons, and reformatories.  We have learned enough  of such settings to 
know that  over time  they can  produce  among their  inmates  a charac- 
teristic  institutional    neurosis  marked  by  apathy, withdrawal,    lack  of 
initiative   and  spontaneity,  uncommunicativeness,    and  intractability. 
The neurosis is an accommodation   to a deprived,  bland,  monotonous, 
controlled  environment   that is ultimately   stupifying.1Â 
     The point   is simply  that  high-modernist    designs  for  life  and pro- 
duction  tend  to  diminish   the  skills,  agility,  initiative,    and  morale  of 
their  intended beneficiaries.  They bring  about a mild  form  of this insti- 
tutional  neurosis. Or, to put it  in the utilitarian   terms  that many of their 
partisans  would  recognize,  these designs tend  to  reduce the  "human 
capital"  of  the workforce.   Complex,  diverse,  animated  environments 
contribute,  as Jacobs saw, to producing  a resilient,  flexible,  adept pop- 
ulation  that  has more experience  in confronting   novel  challenges and 
taking  initiative.   Narrow,  planned  environments,  by  contrast,  foster a 
less skilled,  less innovative,  less resourceful  population.   This  popula- 
tion,  once  created,   would  ironically    have  been  exactly  the  kind   of 
human material   that would  in fact have needed close supervision  from 
above. In other  words, the  logic of social  engineering  on this scale was 
to produce  the sort of subjects that  its plans had assumed at the outset. 
     That  authoritarian   social engineering  failed  to  create a world  after 
its  own  image should  not  blind  us  to the  fact  that  it  did,  at the  very 
least, damage many  of the earlier  structures  of mutuality   and practice 
that  were essential  to metis.  The Soviet kolkhoz  hardly   lived  up to its 
expectations, but by treating  its workforce  more  like factory hands  than 
farmers,  it did destroy  many of the agricultural   skills the peasantry  had 
possessed on the eve of collectivization.   Even if there  was much  in the 
earlier  arrangements   that  ought to  have been abolished  (local  tyran- 
nies based  on class, gender,  age, and lineage),  a certain   institutional 
autonomy  was abolished as well.  Here, I  believe, there is something  to 
the classical  anarchist  claim-that      the state, with  its  positive  law and 
central   institutions,    undermines    individuals'    capacities   for   auton- 
omous  self-governance-that       might  apply   to  the planning    grids  of 
high  modernism   as well.  Their  own  institutional    legacy may  be frail 
and  evanescent, but they may impoverish   the local wellsprings   of eco- 
nomic,  social,  and cultural  self-expression. 

367
350 THE MISSING LINK 


The Failure   of Schematics   and the  Role  of Metis 

    Everything is said to be under the leadership of the Party. No one is in charge 
    of the crab or the fish, but they are all alive. 
     -Vietnamese villager, Xuan Huy village 

Not long  after the decisive  political  opening  in  1989, in what was then 
still  the Soviet  Union,  a congress  of agricultural    specialists was  con- 
vened to  consider  reforms  in  agriculture.    Most participants   were  in 
favor of breaking  up the collectives and privatizing   the land in  the hope 
of recreating  a modern version  of the private  sector that had thrived  in 
the  1920s and that  Stalin   had destroyed  in  1930. And  yet  they were 
nearly  unanimous  in  their   despair  over  what  three  generations  had 
done to  the skills,  initiative,   and  knowledge  of the  kolkhozniki.   They 
compared  their  situation  unfavorably   to that  of  China, where  a mere 
twenty-five  years of  collectivization   had,  they imagined,   left  much  of 
the entrepreneurial    skill  of the  peasantry  intact.   Suddenly  a woman 
from  Novosibirsk   scolded them:  "How  do  you think  the  rural  people 
survived sixty  years of collectivization   in  the first  place? If  they hadn't 
used their   initiative   and  wits,  they  wouldn't   have  made  it  through! 
They may  need credit   and  supplies,  but  there's nothing   wrong  with 
their  initiative."" 
     Despite  the manifold   failures  of collectivization,    it  seems, the kol- 
khozniki  had  found  ways and means to  at least get  by. We should not 
forget in  this  context that  the first  response to collectivization   in  1930 
was determined   resistance  and  even rebellion.   Once that  resistance 
was broken,  the  survivors  had  little  choice  but  to comply  outwardly. 
They could  hardly  make  the rural   command  economy  a success, but 
they could  do what was  necessary to meet minimal  quotas  and ensure 
their  own economic  survival. 
     An indication   of the  kinds of improvisations   both  tolerated  and re- 
quired  may be inferred  from  an astute case study of two  East German 
factories  before   the  Wall  came  down   in  1989.12 Each  factory  was 
under  great pressure to  meet production   cpotasLon    which  their   all- 
important   bonuses depended-in    spite  of old machinery,  inferior   raw 
materials,  and a lack of spare parts. Under  these draconian conditions, 
two  employees were  indispensable  to  the  firm,  despite  their  modest 
place in  the official  hierarchy.  One was  the jack-of-all-trades   who  im- 
provised short-term  solutions  to keep machinery  running,  to correct  or 
disguise production   flaws,  and to make  raw materials  stretch  further. 
The second was a wheeler-dealer  who located  and bought  or bartered 
for spare parts, machinery,  and raw material  that could  not be obtained 
through   official  channels   in  time.  To facilitate    the wheeler-dealer's 

368
                                                                                             Conclusion 35 1 


work,  the factory  routinely   used its  funds  to stock  up on such  valued 
nonperishable  goods  as soap powder,  cosmetics, quality   paper, yarn, 
good wine and  champagne, medicines,  and fashionable  clothes. When 
it seemed that the plant  would  fall  short  of the quota because it lacked 
a key valve or machine tool,  these knowledgeable  dealers would  set off 
across the country, their small Trabant  autos jammed with barter  goods, 
to secure what  was needed. Neither  of these roles  was provided  for  in 
the official  table of  organization,  and yet the  survival  of the factory  de- 
pended more  on their  skills,  wisdom,  and experience  than on those of 
any other  employee. A key  element in  the centrally   planned  economy 
was underwritten,   always  unofficially,  by metis. 
     Cases like the one just described are the rule, not the exception. They 
serve to illustrate   that the  formal  order  encoded in  social-engineering 
designs inevitably  leaves out elements that  are essential to  their actual 
functioning.   If the  factory  were forced  to operate  only within   the con- 
fines of  the  roles  and functions   specified  in  the  simplified   design,  it 
would  quickly  grind to  a halt. Collectivized  command  economies virtu- 
ally  everywhere  have limped  along  thanks  to the  often desperate  im- 
provisation  of  an informal  economy  wholly  outside  its schemata. 
     Stated  somewhat differently,   all socially  engineered systems of for- 
mal order  are  in fact  subsystems of a larger  system on which  they are 
ultimately  dependent, not to  say parasitic. The subsystem relies on a va- 
riety  of processes-frequently     informal  or antecedent-which      alone it 
cannot  create or  maintain.   The more  schematic,  thin,   and simplified 
the formal  order, the less resilient and the more vulnerable it  is to distur- 
bances outside  its narrow   parameters.  This  analysis of  high  modern- 
ism, then,  may appear to be a case for  the invisible  hand of market  co- 
ordination   as opposed to centralized economies. An important  caution, 
however, is in  order. The market is  itself an instituted,  formal  system of 
coordination,  despite the elbow  room that it  provides to its participants, 
and it is therefore  similarly   dependent on a larger system of social rela- 
tions  which  its  own calculus   does not acknowledge  and  which  it  can 
neither  create nor  maintain.   Here I  have in mind  not only  the obvious 
elements  of contract   and property   law, as well   as the state's coercive 
power  to  enforce  them,  but antecedent  patterns  and  norms  of  social 
trust,  community,   and  cooperation,  without   which   market  exchange 
is inconceivable.   Finally,  and most  important,   the economy  is "a  sub- 
system of a finite and nongrowing   eco-system," whose carrying capacity 
and interactions   it must respect as a condition  of its persistence.I3 
      It is,  I think,  a characteristic    of large,  formal  systems of coordina- 
tion  that they  are accompanied by  what appear to  be anomalies but on 
closer  inspection  turn  out to  be integral  to that  formal  order.  Much  of 

369
352 THE MISSING LINK 


this  might  be termed   "metis  to  the rescue,"  although  for  people  en- 
snared in schemes of authoritarian    social engineering  that threaten  to 
do them in,  such improvisations  bear  the mark  of scrambling  and des- 
peration.  Many  modern  cities,  and not  just  those in the  Third  World, 
function  and survive by virtue  of slums and squatter  settlements whose 
residents provide   essential services.  A formal  command   economy, as 
we have seen, is contingent on petty trade, bartering,  and deals that are 
typically  illegal.  A formal  economy of  pension systems, social security, 
and medical  benefits is  underwritten   by a mobile,  floating  population 
with  few  of these protections.   Similarly,   hybrid  crops  in mechanized 
farm operations  persist only  because of the diversity and immunities   of 
antecedent landraces.  In  each case, the nonconforming   practice  is an 
indispensable  condition  for  formal  order. 


A Case for  Metis-Friendly    Institutions 

The invention  of scientific  forestry, freehold  tenure, planned  cities, col- 
lective farms,  ujamaa  villages,  and industrial   agriculture,   for  all their 
ingeniousness, represented fairly  simple  interventions  into enormously 
complex  natural  and  social systems. After  being  abstracted  from  sys- 
tems whose interactions  defied a total accounting,  a few elements were 
then made  the basis for  an imposed order.  At best, the  new order  was 
fragile  and vulnerable,  sustained by improvisations   not  foreseen by its 
originators.   At worst,  it  wreaked  untold   damage in  shattered  lives, a 
damaged ecosystem, and fractured  or impoverished  societies. 
     This rather  blanket  condemnation   must be tempered,  especially  in 
the case of  social  systems, by at  least four  considerations.   First,  and 
most important,   the social orders  they were designed to supplant  were 
typically  so manifestly unjust  and oppressive that almost any new order 
might  seem preferable. Second, high-modernist  social engineering usu- 
ally  came cloaked  in egalitarian,   emancipatory   ideas: equality  before 
the law, citizenship  for  all, and rights  to subsistence, health, education, 
and shelter. The premise  and great appeal of the  high-modernist  credo 
was that  the state  would  make the  benefits  of technological   progress 
available  to all its  citizens. 
     The  two  remaining   reasons  for  tempering   our  condemnation    of 
such schemes have less to do with  their  potentially   destructive  conse- 
quences than  with   the capacity  of  ordinary   human  actors  to  modify 
them or,  in the end, to bring  them  down.  Where functioning   represen- 
tative  institutions  were  at hand, some accommodation   was inevitable. 
In  their  absence, it is still  remarkable   how the  dogged, day-to-day  re- 

370
                                                                                             Conclusion 353 


sistance of thousands  of  citizens  forced the  abandonment  or  restruc- 
turing   of projects.   Given  sufficient   time  and  leeway, of  course,  any 
high-modernist  plan  will  be utterly  remade by popular  practice.  Soviet 
collective  farms,  the most draconian   case, were finally  brought   down 
as much by the dispirited   work  and resistance of the  kolkhozniki   as by 
the political   shifts in  Moscow. 
     Without  denying  the incontestable  benefits  either  of the division  of 
labor  or of  hierarchical   coordination    for  some tasks, I  want  to make 
a case  for  institutions    that  are  instead  multifunctional,     plastic,   di- 
verse, and adaptable-in     other  words, institutions   that  are powerfully 
shaped by metis.  The fact that  those ensnared  in confining   systems of 
formal  order  seem constantly  to  be working,   in their  own  interest,  to 
make the  systems more versatile   is one indication   of  a common  pro- 
cess of "social  domestication."   A second indication   is the  social  mag- 
netism of autonomy  and  diversity  as seen, for example, in the popular- 
ity   of   Jacobs's  mixed-use   neighborhoods     and   in   the   continued 
attraction  of  self-employment. 
     Diversity   and certain  forms  of complexity,   apart from  their  attrac- 
tiveness, have other advantages. In natural  systems, we know, these ad- 
vantages are manifold.   Old-growth  forests, polycropping,   and agricul- 
ture  with  open-pollinated   landraces  may  not be as productive,   in the 
short  run, as single-species forests  and fields  or identical  hybrids.  But 
they are  demonstrably  more  stable,  more self-sufficient,   and less vul- 
nerable to  epidemics  and environmental   stress, needing far  less in the 
way of external  infusions  to keep them on track.  Every time  we replace 
"natural   capital"  (such  as wild  fish stocks  or old-growth   forests)  with 
what  might be called  "cultivated  natural  capital"   (such as fish farms or 
tree  plantations),  we  gain  in ease of appropriation    and  in immediate 
productivity,   but  at  the cost  of  more maintenance   expenses and  less 
"redundancy,   resiliency,   and  stability."14 If   the  environmental   chal- 
lenges faced by  such systems are both modest  and predictable,   then a 
certain   simplification    might  also  be relatively   stable.lS  Other  things 
being  equal,  however,  the less diverse  the cultivated   natural   capital, 
the more vulnerable  and nonsustainable it  becomes. The problem is that 
in  most economic  systems, the external costs (in water  or air  pollution, 
for  example, or the  exhaustion of nonrenewable  resources,  including  a 
reduction   in biodiversity)   accumulate long  before the activity  becomes 
unprofitable   in  a narrow  profit-and-loss  sense. 
      A roughly  similar  case can be made, I think,  for  human  institutions 
-a    case that contrasts the fragility   of rigid,  single-purpose, centralized 
institutions  to the adaptability  of more  flexible, multipurpose,  decentral- 

371
354 THE MISSING LINK 


ized social forms.  As long as the task environment   of an institution   re- 
mains repetitive,   stable,  and predictable,   a  set of fixed  routines  may 
prove exceptionally  efficient.  In  most economies  and in  human affairs 
generally, this  is  seldom  the case, and  such  routines  are  likely  to  be 
counterproductive    once  the  environment   changes  appreciably.   The 
long-term  survival of  certain human  institutions-the      family, the small 
community,  the  small farm,  the  family  firm  in  certain  businesses-is 
something  of a tribute   to their  adaptability    under radically   changing 
circumstances. They are by no means infinitely  adaptable, but they have 
weathered  more  than  one prediction   of  their   inevitable  demise.  The 
small family   farm,  by virtue  of its  flexible  labor  (including   the exploi- 
tation  of its children),   its capacity  to  shift into  new  crops or  livestock, 
and its  tendency to  diversify  its risks,  has managed  to persist  in com- 
petitive  economies  when  many  huge, highly   leveraged,  mechanized, 
and specialized  corporate  and state  farms have failed.16 In  a sector of 
the economy  where local  knowledge,  quick  responses to weather  and 
crop conditions,  and low overhead (smallness) are more important   than 
in, say, large industry, the family  farm has some formidable  advantages. 
     Even in  huge organizations,  diversity pays dividends  in stability  and 
resilience.  A one-product   city  like  the  Stalinist  steel-making  jewel  of 
Magnitogorsk  is vulnerable when its technology  is superseded and more 
specialty products   are required,  whereas  a nonspecialized  city  with  a 
host of industries  and a diverse labor force  can weather greater  shocks. 
Within  the  most industrialized   economies,  it is  still  striking  that  com- 
plex and often low-income  subsistence strategies, self-provisioning,  and 
working   off  the  books are  both  widespread   and  essential,  although 
they  are  nearly   invisible   in  most  forms   of  economic   accounting.17 
Much has also been made of the rather  complex family  firms  in Emilia- 
Romagna,  Italy,  which  have  thrived  for  generations   in  an extremely 
competitive   world  textile   market  by virtue   of networks   of mutuality, 
adaptability,  and a highly  skilled and  committed  workforce.  The family 
firms  are at  the same time  embedded in  a much-studied   local  society 
that  is  several centuries   deep in  associational   life  and  civic  skills.lS 
These firms  and the  dense, diverse societies  upon which  they  depend 
have  increasingly   seemed less  like  archaic   survivals  and  more  like 
forms  of  enterprise  ideally   suited  to postindustrial    capitalism.   Even 
within  the  narrow  confines of market  competitiveness  in liberal  indus- 
trial  societies, the case for polyvalent,   adaptive, small  units is stronger 
than any  high modernist  of  the 1920s could  possibly have imagined. 
     Once we  measure such polyvalent   institutions   by broader  criteria, 
moreover,  the case becomes  even more  powerful.   Much  of the  argu- 
ment  at this level  comes back to the question  posed earlier:  what  kind 

372
                                                                                             Conclusion 35 5 


of person  does this  sort  of institution    foster? No  one has established 
the link  between  economic  enterprise   and political   skills  better  than 
Thomas Jefferson in  his celebration  of  the yeoman farmer.  The auton- 
omy  and  the  skills  required   in   independent  farming,    Jefferson  be- 
lieved, helped  to nurture  a citizen  with  a habit  of responsible  decision 
making,  enough property   to avoid  social dependence,  and a tradition 
of reasoning  and  negotiation   with  his  fellow  citizens.  The  yeomanry 
was, in short,  an ideal  training  ground  for  democratic  citizenship. 
     To any  planned,   built,   or  legislated  form  of  social  life,   one may 
apply a comparable  test: to what degree does it promise  to enhance the 
skills,  knowledge,  and responsibility   of those  who are  a part of  it? On 
narrower  institutional   grounds,  the question would  be how deeply that 
form  is marked by  the values and experience  of those who compose it. 
The purpose in  each case would  be to distinguish   "canned"  situations 
that permit  little   or no modification   from  situations largely  open to the 
development  and application   of metis. 
     A  brief  example  comparing   war   memorials   may be  helpful.   The 
Vietnam  Memorial  in  Washington,  D.C., is surely  one of the most  suc- 
cessful war  memorials  ever built,  if one  is to judge by the quantity  and 
intensity  of the  visits it  receives. Designed  by Maya Lin,  the memorial 
consists simply  of a gently  undulating   site marked  (not dominated)  by 
a long, low, black marble  wall  listing the names of the fallen. The names 
are listed  neither   alphabetically   nor  by military   unit   but chronologi- 
cally,  in the  order  in  which   they fell-thus      grouping   those who  had 
fallen  on the  same day in  the  same engagement.19 No larger  claim  is 
made about  the war  either  in  prose or  in  sculpture-which      is hardly 
surprising,  in view of the stark political   cleavages the war still inspires.20 
What is most  remarkable,  however, is the way that  the Vietnam Memo- 
rial  works  for  those  who visit   it, particularly    those who  come  to pay 
their  respects  to the  memory  of  a comrade  or loved  one. They  touch 
the names incised  on the  wall,  make rubbings,  and leave artifacts  and 
mementos of  their  own-everything     from  poems and  a woman's high- 
heeled shoe to a glass of champagne  and a poker  hand of  a full house, 
aces high.  So many of these tributes  have been left,  in fact,  that  a mu- 
seum has  been created  to house them.  The  scene of many  people to- 
gether at the wall,  touching  the names of particular   loved ones who fell 
in  the same war,  has moved observers  regardless  of their  position  on 
the  war  itself.  I  believe that  a  great part   of the  memorial's  symbolic 
power  is its  capacity  to honor  the  dead with  an  openness that allows 
visitors   to impress  upon  it  their   own  meanings, their   own  histories, 
their  own  memories.  The memorial  virtually   requires  participation    in 
order  to complete  its  meaning.  Although  one would  not compare  it  to 

373
356 THE MISSING LINK 


a Rorschach test, the memorial   nevertheless does achieve its meaning 
as much by what  citizens bring  to  it as by what  it imposes. 
     Compare  the Vietnam  Memorial   to a very  different  American   war 
memorial:  the  sculpture  depicting  the  raising  of the  American  flag at 
the summit  of Mount  Suribachi   on Iwo  Jima in  World War  11. Moving 
in its  own  right,  referring   as it  does to  the final  moment  of  a victory 
gained at an enormous  cost in  lives, the  Iwo  Jima statue  is manifestly 
heroic. Its patriotism   (symbolized by the flag), its reference to conquest, 
its larger-than-life   scale, and its implicit   theme of unity  in victory  leave 
little  room for  wondering   what is expected  from  the viewer. Given  the 
virtual  unanimity  with  which that  war was, and is, viewed in  the United 
States, it  is hardly   surprising  that  the  Iwo  Jima  memorial   should  be 
monumental   and  explicit   about   its  message.  Although   not  exactly 
'canned,"  the Iwo  Jima site  is more symbolically   self-sufficient,  as are 
most war  memorials.   Visitors  can  stand in  awe,  gazing on  an image 
that through  photographs  and  sculpture  has become a virtual  icon  for 
the War in  the  Pacific, but  they  receive its  message rather  than  com- 
pleting  it.21 
     An institution,  social  form, or enterprise  that takes much of its shape 
from the evolving  metis of the people engaged in it will  thereby enhance 
their range  of experience and  skills. Following   the advice of the saying 
"Use it or  lose it," the metis-friendly   institution   both uses and renews a 
valuable public   good. As an  exclusive litmus   test for  all  social forms, 
this is clearly  insufficient.  All  social forms  are "artificially"   constructed 
to serve some human  purpose. Where  that purpose  is narrow,  simple, 
and invariable  over time,  it may well  be that codified,  hierarchical  rou- 
tines are adequate and possibly the most efficient  in the short run.  Even 
in such cases, however, we should be aware  of the human costs of stul- 
tifying  routines  and the likely  resistance to rote  performance. 
     Whenever,  on  the contrary,   the  quality   of  the  institution   and  its 
product  depends on engaging the  enthusiastic  participation   of its peo- 
ple, then such a litmus  test makes sense. In the case of housing,  for ex- 
ample,  its  success cannot be  severed from   the opinions   of its  users. 
Housing  planners that  take as a given  the variety  of human  tastes and 
the inevitable  (but unpredictable)   changes in the  shape of families will 
accommodate   that  variation    from   the  outset  by  providing   flexible 
building   designs and adjustable   floor  plans.  Developers of  neighbor- 
hoods, by the same token,  will  promote   the sort of  diversity  and com- 
plexity  that will   help to  ensure their  vitality   and durability.   Above all, 
those with planning   and zoning powers  will  not see their task as one of 
making  sure that neighborhoods   hold, through  thick  and thin,  to  their 
designed forms. One can imagine  many types of institutions-schools, 

374
                                                                                             Conclusion 357 


parks, playgrounds,   civic  associations, business  enterprises,  families, 
even planning bodies-that     might  well  be evaluated through  the same 
lens. 
     A good many institutions   in liberal  democracies  already take such a 
form  and may serve as exemplars for  fashioning  new  ones. One could 
say that democracy  itself  is based on the assumption  that  the metis  of 
its citizenry  should, in  mediated form,  continually   modify  the laws and 
policies of  the land. Common  law,  as an institution,   owes its longevity 
to the fact  that  it is not  a final  codification   of legal  rules,  but rather   a 
set of procedures   for  continually   adapting  some  broad  principles   to 
novel circumstances.  Finally,  that  most characteristic   of  human  insti- 
tutions,  language, is the best model:  a structure  of meaning  and conti- 
nuity  that  is never  still  and ever  open to  the improvisations    of all  its 
speakers. 


